The Indian of the Bolivian plateau is still only a half-civilized man

and less than half a Christian. He retains his primeval Nature worship,

which groups together the spirits that dwell in mountains, rivers, and

rocks with the spirits of his ancestors, revering and propitiating all

as _Achachilas_. In the same ceremony his medicine man invokes the

Christian "_Dios_" to favor the building of a house, or whatever he

them also by offerings, the gift made to the Earth Spirit being buried

in the soil. Similarly he retains the ceremonial dances of heathendom,

and has secret dancing guilds, of whose mysteries the white man can

His morality is what it was, in theory and practice, four centuries

ago. He neither loves nor hates, but fears, the white man, and the

white man neither loves nor hates, but despises him; there being some

and pure Europeans is very uncommon. They are held together neither

by social relations nor by political, but by the need which the white

landowner has for the Indian's labor and by the power of long habit,

which has made the Indian acquiesce in his subjection as a rent payer.

Neither of them ever refers to the Spanish Conquest. The white man

does not honor the memory of Pizarro; to the Indian the story is too

dim and distant to affect his mind. Nor is it the least remarkable

feature of the situation that the mestizo, or half-breed, forms no

link between the races. He prefers to speak Spanish which the Indian

rarely understands. He is held to belong to the upper race, which is,

for social and political purpose, though not by right of numbers, the

With the exception of Paraguay, Bolivia is the only entirely inland

State in South America. It is really a manufactured nation. When

the War of Independence of that part of South America ended, the

revolutionary leaders set up this country as an independent State, and

gave it the name of Bolivia, in honor of Simon Bolivar, the Liberator,

himself a native of Venezuela. Bolivia is bounded on the north and east

by Brazil, on the south by Paraguay and Argentina, and on the west by

In its early days Bolivia was simply a part of the empire of the Incas

of Peru. The story of the Incas has been given in Mentor No. 132,

"Peru." After the conquest of Peru by the Spaniards in the sixteenth

century, the natives were subjected to a great deal of tyranny and

oppression. They were compelled to work in the mines, and endured so

rulers. The Indian revolt in Cuzco (koos´-ko or kooth´-ko), Peru,

which was led by the Inca Tupac Amaru (too´-pahk ah-mah-roo´), stirred

up the Bolivian Indians to further efforts. For three months Ayoayo

(ei-o-ei´-o) with 80,000 men, besieged the city of La Paz (lah pahth;

local pronunciation, lah pahs´). Finally his army was dispersed and the

Injustice had been worked not only upon the Indians, but upon the

native born Spanish-Americans. These grew restless at last, and on

July 16, 1809, conspirators at La Paz deposed and put into prison the

governor, and then proclaimed the independence of the country. One of

or moo-reel´-yo), was elected president. This was the first effort

however, sent a trained army which soon overcame that of the patriots.

On January 29, 1810, Murillo perished on the scaffold. In the face of

death, however, he exclaimed: "The torch which I have lighted shall

From then on until 1825 there was almost uninterrupted warfare. Success

was equally divided at first between the Spanish and the revolutionary

forces. On December 9, 1824, the Battle of Ayacucho (i-ah-koo´-cho), in

lower Peru, finally ended Spanish dominion in South America. General

Sucre (soo´-kray) was the victorious general. On January 29, 1825, the

last Spanish authorities vacated La Paz. General Sucre and his army

made a triumphal entry there on February 7, 1825. This general now

assumed supreme command in upper Peru. The first national assembly

met in June at the city of Chuquisaca (choo-kee-sah´-kah), now called

Sucre. They decided that the part of the country hitherto known as

upper Peru should be made a separate and independent nation, with the

name of Bolivia. The Act of Independence bears the date of August 6,

Chuquisaca was made the capital under the name of Sucre. When General

Bolivar arrived in the city of La Paz on August 18th, he was greeted

with wild enthusiasm. He was inaugurated at Sucre in November; but

resigned in January, 1826, to return to Lima (lee´-mah) in Peru.

There was no peace for the people of Bolivia yet, however. Troublous

times followed, and finally came the war with Chile. This war arose

over the collection of an export tax on nitrate. Chile sent troops to

occupy Bolivian territory; and then Peru, linked to Bolivia by secret

treaty, together with that country, declared war on Chile on April 5,

1879. Both Peru and Bolivia were entirely unprepared, and Chile was

completely victorious in this war. As a result Bolivia lost what little

During the last thirty years internal dissensions in Bolivia have for

the most part ceased. There was a brief time of trouble in 1898 over

the question of the capital city. It had been the custom for the cities

to take turns in being the seat of government. In December, 1898,

however, the Bolivian Congress attempted to pass a law making Sucre the

permanent residence of the president and cabinet. La Paz protested,

and the people of the city rose in open revolt. On January 17, 1899, a

battle was fought between the insurgents and the government forces. The

insurgents were completely victorious. As a result, La Paz was made the

real seat of government, although Sucre retains the name of capital.

elected president. In 1903 a boundary dispute with Brazil over some

rich rubber country was settled by the cession by Bolivia of a part

of the province of Acre, (ah´-kray), in return for a cash payment of

ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142

Bolivia is a centralized republic. Its government is representative in

form, but to a great extent it is autocratic in effect. The Bolivian

constitution was adopted on October 28, 1880, and is a model of its

kind. The executive branch of the government consists of a president

and two vice-presidents. They are elected by direct popular vote for

a period of four years, and are ineligible for election for the next

succeeding term. The president has a cabinet of six ministers: Foreign

The legislative branch consists of a national Congress of two houses--a

Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. The Senate is composed of sixteen

members, two from each department, who are elected by direct popular

vote for a period of six years. The Chamber of Deputies is composed of

seventy members, who are elected for a period of four years. Congress

meets annually and its sessions are for sixty days, which may be

extended to ninety days. All male citizens twenty-one years of age

or over, who can read and write and have a fixed independent income,

may vote. The number of citizens who vote, therefore, is very small,

and the country is for that reason under the control of a political

The judiciary consists of a national supreme court, eight superior

district courts, and many lower district courts. The supreme court is

composed of seven justices, elected by the Chamber of Deputies.

In each department or State a prefect appointed by the president has

supreme power. The government of these departments rests with the

The military forces of Bolivia include about 3,000 regulars and

an enrolled force of 80,000 men. This enrolled force, however, is

both unorganized and unarmed. In 1894 a conscription law was passed

providing for compulsory military service for all males between the

ages of twenty-one and fifty years, with two years' actual service in

the regulars for those between twenty-one and twenty-five. This law is

practically a dead letter. There is a military school with sixty cadets

and an arsenal at the city of La Paz. Naturally Bolivia, having no

Bolivia has a free and compulsory school system, but education has

made little progress there. Very few of the people can read and

the languages of the natives, who form a majority of the population.

A great part of the Indians do not understand Spanish at all and will

not learn it. The school enrollment is about one in forty-four. There

university at Sucre, which dates from colonial times, and that of La

Paz, are the only ones well enough equipped to merit the title.

The Constitution of Bolivia says: "The State recognizes and supports

the Roman Apostolic Catholic religion, the public exercise of any

other worship being prohibited, except in the colonies, where it is

belonging to other religious sects. The Indians profess the Roman

Catholic faith, but this is tinged with the superstitions of their

At this point it will be interesting to consider the Indians of

Bolivia. The population of the country is composed of Indians and

Caucasians of European origin, and a mixture of the two races,

generally described as _mestizos_ (mes-tee´zos). There is also a small

in colonial times. Naturally, the Indians are in great majority. The

Bolivian Indian is essentially a farmer. Scarcely any of these Indians

Of the various tribes of Indians, the Aymaras are the most civilized.

and industrious. They have little ambition, and are held almost in a

state of peonage. Inhabiting the southern part of the Bolivian plains

Guarani race which drifted westward, to the vicinity of the Andes, long

ago. They are of a superior physical and mental type, and have made a

great deal of progress toward civilization. Of the wild Indians very

little is known in regard to either their numbers or customs.

connecting link between the whites and the Indians. It has been said

of the _mestizos_ that they inherit the vices of both races and the

ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142

"Imagine," says James Bryce, "a country as big as the German and

Austrian dominions put together, with a population less than that of

Indians, and a few educated men of European and mixed stock, scattered

here and there in half a dozen towns, none of which has more than

a small number of capable citizens of that stock." That country is

The popular idea of Bolivia is that it is an extremely rugged,

mountainous country. In fact, only two-fifths of the total area of

Bolivia is comprised within the Andine Cordilleras, which cross its

southwest corner. Three-fifths of the country is composed of low,

alluvial plains, great swamps and flooded bottom lands, and gently

Bolivia lies wholly within the torrid zone. The only variations in

temperature, therefore, are due to elevation. For this reason the

country possesses every degree of temperature, from that of the

tropical lowlands to the Arctic cold of the snow-capped peaks directly

Bolivia has many interesting animals. There are numerous species of

monkeys that inhabit the forests of the tropical region, together with

the puma, jaguar, wild cat, tapir, and sloth. A rare bear, the _Ursus

chinchilla lives in the colder plateau regions of the country. The

most interesting of all the Bolivian animals, however, are the guanaco

and vicuña (vi-koon´yah). These animals have the structure and habits

of the African camel, but are smaller and have no hump. They are able

to go without food and drink for long periods. The llama and the alpaca

have been domesticated for centuries; but the guanaco and vicuña are

found in a wild state only. The llama is used as a pack animal; and the

alpaca is highly prized for its fine wool. The slaughter of the guanaco

Of birds the species in Bolivia are very numerous. The high mountains

are frequented by condors and eagles of the largest size; while the

American ostrich and a species of large stork inhabit the tropical

plains and valleys. The common vulture is scattered throughout the

All sorts of plants, flowers and vegetation are to be found in Bolivia.

Coca (a shrub of the flax family, the dry leaves of which are chewed by

the native Indians as a stimulant) is one of the most important plants

of the country. The most important of the forest products, however,

is rubber. Sugar cane, rice, and tobacco are cultivated in the warm

The most important industry in Bolivia is mining. The lofty and

desert part of the country finds its only natural source of wealth

in minerals. The Western Cordillera is especially rich in copper and

silver, the Eastern in gold and tin. It has been said that one-third of

all the world's production of tin now comes from Bolivia. It was from

the east Andine regions that the Incas obtained those vast stores of

gold which so excited the Spaniards. Legend has it that the gold that

the Spanish took out of the country was much less than that which the

Indians buried or threw into the lakes to keep it from the conquerors.

Next to mining, stock raising is one of the chief industries of the

country. Horses and, to a greater extent, cattle, are raised there.

Although the agricultural resources of Bolivia are of great value,

their development has been slow. Sugar cane is grown, but chiefly for

the manufacture of rum. Rice is also raised, but the quantity is not

great. Tobacco and coffee of fair quality grow readily. The product

that receives most attention, however, is coca. This plant is highly

esteemed by the natives, who chew the leaf. It is also used for

It is from her forests, however, that Bolivia derives the greatest

immediate profit. The most prominent and profitable industry is that

of rubber collecting. This was begun in Bolivia between 1880 and 1890.

In 1903 Bolivia's best rubber forests were transferred to Brazil, but

there still remain extensive areas where good rubber is collected.

The industrial activities of the Bolivian people are still of a very

primitive character. Spinning and weaving are done in the home. The

Indian women are expert weavers. Other industries of some importance

are the manufacture of cigars and cigarettes, soap, candles, hats,

gloves, starch, cheese and pottery. The foreign trade of Bolivia is

comparatively unimportant, with the exception of the products of its

One difficulty that Bolivia has to contend with is the lack of

extent, but great plans are on foot to remedy this. With communications

ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142

La Paz (lah pahth; local pronunciation, lah pahs´) is a most unusual

city. It is the highest capital city in the world--for although Sucre

is the official capital, La Paz is really the capital city of Bolivia.

It lies in a great mountain hollow nearly 13,000 feet above the sea.

This altitude closely approaches that of Pike's Peak; but whereas such

an altitude in our country would mean perpetual snow, here it brings

only a temperate climate, where flowers blossom throughout the year and

the little snow that falls quickly vanishes in the morning sunlight.

The city's official name is La Paz de Ayacucho (eiah-koo´cho). It

is built in a deeply worn valley of the Cordillera Real, which is

believed to have formed an outlet of Lake Titicaca (tee-tee-kah´kah).

La Paz is built on both banks of the Rio de La Paz, or Rio Chuquiapu,

thirty miles southeast of Lake Titicaca. The valley in which the

city lies is about ten miles long and three miles wide. It is very

barren and forbidding, and its precipitous sides, gullied by rains

and colored by mineral ores, rise 1,500 feet above the city. Above

Cordilleras rear their snow-capped peaks. The upper edge of the valley

is called the Alto de La Paz, or Heights of La Paz.

The city is surprisingly large, its population being about 80,000.

Two-thirds of the population consists of Indians. They give a

picturesqueness to the place, the women of the Cholos (cho´los), or

The greater part of La Paz lies on the left bank of the river. Both

banks rise steeply from the stream, and the streets at right angles to

the river are very precipitous. All the streets are narrow, and paved

with small cobblestones. The sidewalks also are so narrow that only two

may go abreast. Many of the inhabitants prefer to walk in the middle of

the street. The only things likely to be met are either pedestrians or

llamas, the latter used in great numbers in this part of the country as

La Paz was founded in 1548 by the Spaniard, Alonzo de Mendoza

(ahlon´tho day men-do´-thah), on the site of an Indian village called

the end of the war of independence, in 1825, it was re-named La Paz de

Ayacucho, in honor of the last decisive battle of the revolution. La

Paz was then made one of the four capitals of the Bolivian republic.

When the Bolivian Congress, however, attempted to designate Sucre as

the permanent capital, the citizens of La Paz revolted; and by this

revolution of 1898 the seat of government was permanently established

One of the most interesting parts of the city to visitors is the

of trees, shrubs and flowers. It also has a wide central walk with

pools, in which are swans and goldfish. Along the Alameda are many new

and rather pretty residences. Most of the houses are painted in tints

of pale blue, green, yellow and strawberry, giving the street a gay and

The Plaza Murillo is so named from the patriot Pedro Domingo Murillo,

who was executed there in 1810. This spot is also the place where

independence was first declared in 1809. It has been the scene of many

turbulent episodes. On one side of the plaza is the Government Palace,

erected in 1885. This contains the offices of many state officials,

and, in the upper story, the office and residence of the president and

The Cathedral of La Paz, on the same side of the plaza as the

Government Palace, is still in process of construction. The foundations

were laid in 1843. When finished it will be one of the largest and

most expensive cathedrals in South America. It is to be built in the

Græco-Roman style, will have towers nearly 200 feet high, a dome the

top of which will be 150 feet above the floor, and will be capable of

Across the corner from the Government Palace is the Hall of Congress.

Another interesting spot is the market place. Here come thousands of

Other buildings of note are the old University of San Andrés

(ahn-dres´), the Church of San Francisco, the Church of Santo Domingo,

the Museum of Natural History, rich in relics of the Inca and colonial

periods, the very much up-to-date theater, and the Municipal Library.

The houses of the poorer classes in La Paz are usually built with mud

walls and covered with tiles. The better class dwellings, however, are

La Paz is an important commercial center. It is connected with the

Pacific coast by the Bolivian Railway from Mollendo (mol-yen´-do), to

Puno (poo´-no) and a Bolivian extension from Guaqui (gwah´-kee) to Alto

de La Paz--the two lines being connected by a steamship service across

Lake Titicaca. An electric railway, five miles long, runs from the Alto

ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142

On May 25, 1809, the first city of Spanish South America revolted

against the rule of Spain. That city was Sucre (soo´-kray). This

town was originally the site of an Indian village called Chuquisaca

settled there and called the place Charcas (chahr´-kahs) and Ciudad

de la Plata (thee-oo-thath´ day lah plah´tah), but the natives always

clung to the original Indian name. In time the town became the favorite

residence and health resort of the rich mine owners of Potosí, some

distance away. After the South Americans had won their independence,

the name of Chuquisaca was changed to Sucre, in honor of the general

who won the last decisive battle of the war and then became the first

president of Bolivia. Since that time the city has suffered much from

quarrels between the various factions of Bolivia. It is now the nominal

capital of the republic, but the seat of government for Bolivia is

located in La Paz. Since the government was removed there, Sucre has

The city is in an elevated valley, being about 8,839 feet above the

sea. For this reason it has an exceptionally agreeable climate. In the

vicinity are fertile valleys which provide the city markets with fruits

and vegetables. The population of the city is about 25,000.

Sucre is laid out regularly. It has broad streets, a large central

plaza and a public garden, or promenade, called the Prado. There are

nine plazas altogether. That called the "25 de Mayo" has a stream

on each side. One of these flows northward and joins the Mamoré

(mah-mo-ray´) and so reaches the Amazon. The other turns southeast,

going on to the Pilcomayo (peel-ko-my´-o) and at last to the estuary

of La Plata (lah-plah´-tah). The Cathedral of Sucre, called the

Metropolitan Cathedral, is the richest in Bolivia. It dates from 1553,

and possesses an image of solid gold with a rich adornment of jewels,

called "The Virgin of Guadalupe (gwah-dah-loo´-pay)." This is said to

be worth a million dollars. The legislative palace of Sucre contains

handsomely decorated halls; but this building is no longer occupied

as such by the national government. Other important buildings are the

Cabildo (kah-beel´do), or town hall; the mint, dating from 1572; the

courts of justice; and the University of San Francisco Xavier (sahn

At the lower end of the central plaza, or Prado (prah´do) is a pretty

chapel called the "Rotunda." This was erected in 1852 by President

Belzu (bale´-thoo), on the spot where an unsuccessful attempt had been

Sucre is the seat of the supreme court of Bolivia, and also of the

archbishop of La Plata and Charcas, the primate of Bolivia.

The city is not a commercial one. Its only noteworthy manufacture is

the "clay dumplings" which are eaten with potatoes by the inhabitants

of the Bolivian uplands. In spite of being the capital of the country,

it is one of its most isolated towns, because of the difficult

character of the roads leading to it. It is reached from the Pacific

by way of Challapata (chahl-ya-pah´tah), a station on the Antofagasta

ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142

It was founded in 1574 in a beautiful valley on the east side of the

mountains, which are here called the Royal Range. For a time the town

was known as Oropesa (o-ro-pay´sah). During the war of independence,

the people of the city took an active part; the women especially

distinguished themselves in an attack on the Spanish camp in 1815.

Three years later some of them were put to death by the Spanish forces.

In general, the isolated situation of Cochabamba has been a protection

against the disorders which have from time to time upset Bolivia.

Cochabamba stands on the Rocha (ro´cha), a small tributary of the

Indians and _mestizos_. The city is 8,400 feet above the sea, 291

miles north-northwest of Sucre, and 132 miles east-northeast of Oruro

(o-roo´-ro). A newly constructed railway runs from Oruro to Cochabamba.

The climate is mild and temperate, and the surrounding country fertile

and cultivated. Trade is active; and in fact the city is one of the

most progressive in Bolivia, in spite of its isolated situation. It is

laid out regularly and contains many attractive buildings. The city has

a university and two colleges, but they are poorly equipped.

The name of the city of Potosí (po-to-see´) has become proverbial and

"smacks of almost magical and unearthly wealth." It possesses some of

the most wonderful silver mines in the world. Founded in 1547, shortly

after the first discovery of silver there by an Indian herder, it has

since produced an enormous amount of the precious metal. One writer

estimates the yield of the mines there as having been worth one billion

dollars. Seven thousand mines have been started, of which seven hundred

are being worked for silver and tin today. At one time the city had a

population of 150,000, which has now dwindled to about 25,000.

Potosí stands on a barren terrace about 13,000 feet above sea level,

and is one of the highest towns in the world. It is 47 miles southwest

of Sucre in a direct line. The famous Cerro Gordo (ser´-ro gor´-do;

Spanish, ther´-ro gor´-do) de Potosí rises above the town to a height

of 15,381 feet, a barren, white capped mountain, honeycombed with

mining shafts. The town itself is laid out regularly. A large plaza

forms the center, around which are grouped various buildings, such as

the government house, national college, the old "Royal Mint," dating

from 1585, and the treasury. The city has a cathedral, which in part

dates from early colonial times. The water supply is derived from a

constructed by the Spanish government during the years of the city's

Oruro (o-roo´-ro) is an important mining town of about 20,000 people.

During the colonial period this town was noted next to Potosí, for the

richness and productiveness of its mines. The mines in the neighborhood

Oruro is 115 miles south-southeast in a direct line from La Paz. It

stands 12,250 feet above sea level, and its climate is characterized by

a short, cool summer and a cold, rainy winter. Oruro is the Bolivian

constructed in Bolivia. In time the city promises to be one of the most

plaza. Besides these, the city has a theater, a public library and a

mineralogical museum, as well as the usual churches, hospitals and

There is one other region in Bolivia that should be visited by all

travelers interested in the mysterious past of the country. This region

is called Tiahuanacu (tee-ah-wah-nah´-koo). It is not far from La Paz,

and the ruins there were believed by Sir Clements Markham to indicate

the former existence of a large city of the Incas. One huge gateway,

broken and apparently not in its original position, is especially

interesting. This great piece of stone is 13 feet wide, 7 feet above

the ground, and 3 feet thick. It is curiously and elaborately carved.

In the center is a human head, supposed to represent the creator of the

universe. To this, other figures, partly human and some with heads of

Other stones in this region are remarkable for their size and for the

ornamental carving that appears upon them. All the ruins are apparently

of great age. It is not difficult to imagine a time when the city was

the home of thousands of human beings in a very advanced stage of

ILLUSTRATION FOR THE MENTOR. VOL. 5, No. 18, SERIAL No. 142

Entered as second-class matter March 10, 1913, at the post-office at

New York, N. Y., under the act of March 3, 1879. Copyright, 1917, by

Bolivia is another Thibet; one of the highest inhabited plateaus in the

world. It is one of the richest mineral sections, as it now produces

about one-third of the world's supply of tin, and contains vast wealth

in its rich copper, gold, and silver mines. Nearly ninety per cent. of

its population is of Indian origin, and to this fact may be attributed

its slow progress; as outside of its capital city, almost everything is

Since its last war with Chile, it has been shut off from the sea-coast;

and to get to Bolivia one must now cross either Chile or Peru, which

necessitates a long journey by rail; and if the entrance be by way of

the Peruvian gateway, Mollendo, Lake Titicaca must also be crossed.

The parts of this steamer were carried to the lake by rail and put

Lying in a valley, at an altitude of more than 12,000 feet above the

level of the sea, is the Bolivian capital, La Paz, the City of Peace.

It is picturesquely situated in a huge bowl, cut into the plateau;

and to reach it one must descend in an electric car, 1,300 feet down

the steep slope, where, at the bottom of the cup, lies a city of

more than 150,000 people. In its situation, it is probably the most

remarkable of all capitals. Although called the City of Peace, it has

been the scene of turmoil and strife ever since the Spaniards invaded

these solitudes. Rising high above the city is beautiful Illimani,

one of the highest peaks of the Andes. Perpetually clad in snow,

this magnificent mountain dominates the view, and is one of the most

In the central square of La Paz rises the cathedral, which has been in

process of building for forty years, and at the rate it is progressing

it will probably not be completed for another century. On this same

central square is the Bolivian House of Congress, nearly all of its

members of Indian origin. This plaza is the center of political life,

Plaza San Francisco is another of the important squares of the city,

and takes its name from the magnificent church, one of the most

artistic structures in South America. Upon this square, at all hours

of the day, there is a fascinating panorama of life; for, passing

of them driving burros or the Andean beast of burden, the llama.

In no other city of the world are the costumes worn by Indians as

elaborate as those seen in the streets of La Paz. The Cholo or

half-breed is resplendent in garments of the brightest colors. The

women in particular are gorgeously arrayed in silk skirts, kid boots

There is a curious custom which is rigidly observed. Full blooded

Indians must wear felt hats, and are looked upon as inferior in social

standing. The Cholos may always be distinguished by their straw hats,

which are never worn by the others. Having married a Bolivian, or

perhaps a white man, a Cholo woman considers herself quite a superior

being. She delights in patronizing the best shops, where she seeks only

the costliest silks, the gayest of shawls, and kid boots with high

heels, which are imported from France or from the United States.

When fully attired, she is a sight to behold. Arrayed in all her

finery, she promenades like a queen through the streets of the city;

and yet, back of it all, the influence of blood is evident. She may

dress ever so elaborately, but the old customs still cling; she still

insists upon carrying her baby on her back in good old Indian fashion,

and she is not averse to carrying her market basket when she goes to

the market to make her purchases. Most numerous among the Indians

are the Aymaras, who, unlike the Quichua Indians of Peru, are surly

and inclined to hold aloof from the white man. They are seemingly

indifferent to the white man's influence. For clothing, the Aymará men

wear shirts and trousers of a coarse cotton material; and over their

shoulders is thrown a poncho of heavy woolen cloth. Aside from their

poncho, the most attractive part of their costume is a curious woolen

a climate where it is always cold except at midday, these caps with

their long ear-muffs are very serviceable. Women who are wives of

full-blooded Indians make no pretension in the way of attire, and they

accept without question their social status, which relegates them to an

Much of the trading carried on with the Indians is done by barter; they

bring their farm and garden produce to the city, and exchange it with

dealers for groceries or wearing apparel. Very few of them accumulate

Many of their laws are unique, and are no doubt born of tribal customs

which have been handed down for generations, and yet are usually

rigidly observed. If, for instance, a doctor loses seven patients,

Indian law decrees that the career of the doctor must terminate, and

that his life must be a forfeit for his failure to save the lives of

his patients. After the Indian doctor has lost his sixth patient, he

Although the Bolivian capital is overwhelmingly Indian in point of

population, in appearance it is decidedly modern. Its streets are

paved with cobblestones, but as a rule are clean and kept in good

condition. The pavements may be rough, but it must be borne in mind

that there are very few level thoroughfares; most of the streets are

very hilly, and would be almost impossible to navigate were it not for

the cobblestones, which permit men and beasts to maintain a foothold.

Municipal laws will not permit Indians to make use of the thoroughfares

for their llamas during business hours; they are brought into the city

early in the morning, remaining in some patio or courtyard awaiting the

evening hours, when their owners drive them home. At sunset one may see

long trains of these quaint animals driven through the streets on their

way back to the farms. The llama lends picturesqueness to one of the

[Illustration: LA PAZ, VIEWED FROM THE RIM--MT. ILLIMANI IN THE

Little or no coal is burned, as it costs $60 per ton, and only the

very wealthy could afford to use it. There is no wood, so few of the

houses are heated. Most of the English and American residents use oil

burners or electric heaters in their homes; but even the principal

hotel is so cold that men usually go to dinner in their overcoats and

the women enveloped in furs. Most visitors usually retire immediately

after dining, as the night air is so cold that it can be endured only

by those acclimated. It is no uncommon thing for a guest at the hotel

to pile upon his bed all the available covering that he can obtain,

One might imagine that Cholo women are unusually corpulent; but this

is apparent only because of the fact that they don from twelve to

twenty skirts. At times, contests are held between Indian belles as to

which has the more gorgeous petticoats, and also the greater number.

A winner is said to have displayed as many as twenty-four, disclosing

Both Bolivians and Indians are, as a rule, Catholics. On Corpus Christi

day, which is religiously celebrated, there is a curious procession

in which thousands of people take part, and a strange combination of

Cholos, Aymaras and native Bolivians wend their way through the various

thoroughfares. In this parade, the Cholo women discard their straw hats

and wear their shawls instead. Most of them belong to church societies,

and these organizations are indicated by ribbons worn around the neck,

the color denoting the society to which the wearer belongs.

All the dignitaries of the church take part in the Corpus Christi day

procession. Business is practically suspended, and the President of the

Republic, accompanied by the members of the Houses of Congress and all

the officials of the Government, march to the cathedral, where services

are held. On various thoroughfares, altars are erected, and these are

usually decorated by the members of the different ladies' societies.

Religion has a strong hold on the people of Bolivia. One not affiliated

with the church is looked upon with suspicion and becomes a social

outcast. In no other country are the churches better attended.

The most attractive of the thoroughfares in the Bolivian capital is

the Alameda, a wide avenue lined with trees, and having in its center

a promenade. It is on this thoroughfare that the various legation

buildings are situated. As usual, one may walk along this street and

seek for the most unattractive building and be quite sure that it

is the American legation building. Almost every government is here

represented, so that the Alameda might be said to be the center of

La Paz is surprisingly modern in the architecture of its business

structures. Most of the buildings are of brick, plastered over and

painted. Many of its shops would be a credit to an American city. They

are by no means mere country stores, but carry an astonishingly good

class of merchandise, and many of the products of France and the United

States are displayed for sale in the various shop windows. To leave

the capital city, one must ascend by electric railway to the plateau,

where is situated the railway depot. One may go directly south by rail

all the way to Antofagasta, Chile, where steamer connections are made

for Valparaiso. On this journey, one obtains a wonderful view of the

back-bone of the Andes, traveling along a plateau averaging in height

about 14,000 feet above sea level. The snow-clad summits of this mighty

range of mountains are constantly in sight. There are few cities along

the railway. Perhaps the most important of the Bolivian towns is Oruro,

which is in the center of a very rich salt country, and as the railroad

approaches the Chilean boundary there are rich deposits of borax and

Many travelers experience all the terrors of soroche or mountain

sickness when traveling on the high Bolivian plateau. The altitude is

dangerous for some people, and in a few cases results fatally. One

whose heart is weak should not attempt the journey, as it is trying

even upon the strongest constitution, and such evidences of altitude

as nose-bleed and dizzy spells afflict even those who are accustomed to

During the cold winter months, many Bolivians descend the eastern slope

of the Andes to Sucre, which has become a favorite winter resort for

La Paz, and its climate is somewhat milder. Lower down, toward the

Brazilian boundary, there are tropical forests and a wild, uninhabited

country where disease lurks; and here are great jungles and swamps,

tribes, which seem to be immune to the fevers that infest this

low-lying country. Among other important cities in Bolivia are Potosí,

and Cochabamba, where there is an American school, a branch of the

American Institute of La Paz. A number of young American men and women

have voluntarily left home and friends and have gone to Bolivia to

teach the youth of that country. The best families send their children

to the American schools, and the Bolivian boys and girls are not only

taught the English language, but they are made familiar with the

history of the United States. It is the ambition of many of the sons of

Bolivian parents to acquire the language, so that they may make their

future home in America. The American teachers are unusually capable

young men and women, and the standard of efficiency that one finds in

the American Institute is a credit to the young people who have made

The military system is patterned after that of Germany, as the

soldiers of the country have been drilled by German officers, and their

influence is plainly evident in the familiar goose-step and the various

manœuvers that one may observe in military camps. The Bolivian soldiers

have not the fighting qualities of the Chileans, and in past wars have

proved anything but a match for their neighbors to the south.

In going from La Paz to Lake Titicaca, one travels over a level

plateau, nearly three miles above the sea. Little or nothing grows at

this altitude, and the few Indians living on this plain must have their

food supply brought up from the valleys below on the backs of llamas.

Other than mines, there is no inducement for even an Indian to make his

home on this lofty plateau. There is no source of income other than

working in some of the gold, silver and copper mines which abound in

Guaqui, a little town on the shores of Lake Titicaca, is the terminus

of the railway. A regiment of cavalry is stationed at this port, as

it in reality forms the boundary line of the country. In this little

place, one obtains his final glimpse of the picturesquely attired

Cholo women, as they are rarely seen outside of Bolivia. In their

native country, their appearance excites no unusual interest; but even

in Peru they are subjected to a certain amount of ridicule, which is

Because of the intense cold, school children are often seen seated in

the open air, where they may enjoy the benefit of the warm sun. This

applies largely to the smaller towns and villages, as in the larger

Lake Titicaca is a great inland sea, lying between the two ranges of

the Cordillera, and is very high above the ocean. Its area is about

one-third that of Lake Erie, and its present length is about 120 miles,

while its greatest width is about 41 miles. It is, without doubt, one

of the highest navigable bodies of water in the world.

Among the water plants that one sees growing in the lake is a sort of

rush, which abounds in shallow water from two to six feet in depth, and

It is this material which the Indians, having no wood, use to construct

their boats. In these apparently frail craft, propelled by sails of the

same material, they traverse the lake, carrying with them two or three

There is considerable skill exercised in the making of the balsa, as

these reed-boats are called. Centuries of experience have taught the

Indians the process, which has been developed to a remarkable stage of

perfection, enabling them to defy the storms which are so frequent. The

short, heavy waves make navigation dangerous even for much larger boats

Like the waters of Lake Superior, these are too cold for the swimmer;

but the lack of bathing facilities gives the Indian but little concern.

The greatest depth of the lake is said to be about 600 feet. Fish

are plentiful, and the few Indians who live around the shores of the

lake devote themselves principally to fishing. As far as habitation

is concerned, other than Puno on the Peruvian side and Guaqui on the

Four steamers ply to and fro between these ports, connecting with the

train service. These boats were brought from England, taken in sections

by railway and put together on the shores of the lake. They are today

used to transfer freight, which arrives by sea at a Peruvian or Chilean

port, and is carried by rail to Puno, then across the lake to Bolivia.

Numerous islands dot the surface of the lake. One is of real interest.

It is known as Titicaca Island. It has a population of about 300, but

of that number there is but one man who can read and write. In all

Bolivia, only 30,000 children attend school, out of a total population

of 2,000,000. The aborigines do not seem to care for education, and the

On a small island in Lake Titicaca is the ruined Temple of the

Sun, another reminder of the days of the Incas. When that empire

flourished, this portion of Bolivia was also under the domination of

the Inca ruler; and even today, in some parts of Bolivia, one still

comes upon numerous evidences of Inca rule, such as the ruins of

buildings, temples and stone images, which plainly indicate that they

were the work of that remarkable, ancient people. Inaccessible as is

the country, for one who can stand the journey it affords much of

interest. If there were nothing more in Bolivia than the view afforded

in looking down from the rim of the cup upon La Paz, this alone would

tempt one to visit the country. The buildings of this city have the

appearance of so many tea leaves left in the bottom of a cup, so

tiny do they seem from above. Another glorious scene is that of the

encircling mountains that surround Lake Titicaca, crowning it with a

diadem of snow-covered peaks--a view that is unsurpassed among the

Although Bolivia has no seaport, the country has a great network of

rivers. The entire length of Bolivia's navigable streams is about

and communication. The Paraguay River is navigable for about 1,100

miles for steamers of from eight to ten feet draft. The Itenes has

about 1,000 miles of navigable water. Another river, the Beni, is

navigable for 1,000 miles for steamers of six feet draft only. Other

streams, such as the Pilcomayo, Mamoré, Sara, and Paragua Rivers can

accommodate light draft vessels for distances varying from 200 to 1,000

From the ocean Bolivia can be approached through the ports of Mollendo,

in Peru, or Arica and Antofagasta in Chile. These are all regular ports

of call of the steamers between Panama and Valparaiso. From these ports

BOLIVIA, THE CENTRAL HIGHWAY OF SOUTH AMERICA _By M. R. Wright_

A SEARCH FOR THE APEX OF AMERICA _By Annie S. Peck_

Information concerning the above books may be had on application to

Let me tell you about our daily mail. We get letters of appreciation

and letters of suggestion--hundreds of both kinds. Many of them

are addressed to the "Editor of The Mentor," others to "Dear Mr.

Editor"--and some to "Mr. Moffat." I like the last form best, for I

know that when a member of The Mentor Association writes in a personal

way, with a message of encouragement or a valuable suggestion, The

Mentor has found a real friend. I like to see the spirit of personal

interest growing in our daily mail. It is the best assurance of the

vitality of The Mentor Idea that we could have. Fellowship spirit is

It is pleasing to see how close an interest some of our members take in

the details of The Mentor work. The following letter came to me a day

or so ago--and it is too good to keep to myself.

"_My dear Mr. Moffat_: When I opened the Hawaiian number of The

Mentor, I was delighted to find a greeting from you on the inside

of the front cover page. Now that you have moved over there, why

don't you stay? Of course, I don't know anything about the workings

of an editorial office, and it may mean a furious amount of

trouble. You might have to move your desk and your whole staff, and

even have to get out a new copyright, but from an outsider's point

of view the move looks easy. And to my way of thinking the front

of the magazine is the place for you anyway--if you will permit

me to say so. There you seem to stand as a host at the threshold,

"Who is Sylvia? What is she?"--so Shakespeare and Schubert sang. And

if they couldn't tell who Sylvia was, how can I? Of one thing I feel

sure: she is a faithful reader of The Mentor, for she has taken note of

our goings and comings, and our varied forms of editorial expression.

The notion of my being the "host" is an inviting one. It is a role that

one should be proud to fill, especially when the feast to which he

invites his guests is the wealth of the world's knowledge. The thought

of assuming that role, however, is a bit staggering. Thanks, Miss

Sylvia, but perhaps I had better play the more generally useful part of

planning, preparing and making up The Mentor feast. Your welcome to the

second cover page is appreciated. I have been there many times before,

however, when the page has borne no signature. No number of The Mentor

appears, Miss Sylvia, without my being around somewhere. I have no

preference for one particular page. I find occupation and joy on every

Here are some of the things that we do in reply to letters.

We answer questions in the various fields of knowledge. We look

up sources of information for our readers and give them full

replies. We have just mailed a letter in which answers were made to

historical questions that called for a morning's research by one of

We supply programs for reading clubs and lay out schedules for a

We supply material extracted from reference works for the benefit

We occasionally read essays or papers that have been prepared by

work, we lay out reading courses for private individuals who are

In some cases, where a member lives in a remote spot and cannot

conveniently obtain books, we get them for the member at

publisher's prices. Occasionally, where books could not be had in

We give full information and service in art, telling our readers

where and how to get good pictures--we also give travel information.

These are but a few of the things that we do. We have a booklet in

which we describe The Mentor Service. Send for it. If you have not had

the benefit of our service, you will be surprised to see how wide and

The Prize Contest Letters have been coming in fast. There are so many

good ones that it will be difficult to make a choice. I am going to

print extracts from some of them. A part of the first letter appears on

the opposite page. It tells of The Mentor as a _friend_. Could there be

any happier note to begin with than that? Other letters will tell of

the many ways in which The Mentor is or can be made valuable in home,

school and social life. The story of one reader will help another, and

the sum total of the information will be of benefit to all.

"Some time ago a very neat stranger called at my home and made the hour

so pleasant, that he at once became my friend. Now this friend has a

permanent place in my home, and is known throughout the vicinity as

"The reason why so many are acquainted with this friend of mine is

because of his value and usefulness manifested in every subject and

service. The Mentor has a permanent personal and social value. There

might be added that also of inspiration. The Mentor has a message of

interest and importance. It has a voice with a true ring, that speaks,

"In company with this companion and friend, one may be charmed as the

story of the distant past or that of unfamiliar and remote things,

people and places is being unfolded. Hardly can there be found any one

"The Mentor calls twice a month to inform, enlarge the vision, to

inspire and encourage old and young, men and women, in all walks of

"The social value is vital. Whether it be in the home or elsewhere,

The Mentor furnishes food for intelligent conversation that has weight

and depth. The personal value is realized more and more as the weeks

come and go. Impressions are left on the mind which in time ripen into

"If I wished to make a friend more friendly, I would give him The

Mentor. If I had an enemy--well--I would send him The Mentor. It might

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, Inc., 222 Fourth Avenue, New York, N. Y.

by the Act of Congress of August 24, 1912, of The Mentor, published

semi-monthly at New York, N. Y., for October 1, 1917. State of New

York, County of New York. Before me, a Notary Public, in and for the

State and county aforesaid, personally appeared Thomas H. Beck, who,

having been duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that he

is the Publisher of The Mentor, and that the following is, to the

best of his knowledge and belief, a true statement of the ownership,

management, etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown in

the above caption, required by the Act of August 24, 1912, embodied

in section 443, Postal Laws and Regulations, to wit: (1) That the

names and addresses of the publisher, editor, managing editor, and

business manager are: Publisher, Thomas H. Beck, 52 East 19th Street,

New York; Editor, W. D. Moffat, 222 Fourth Avenue, New York; Managing

Editor, W. D. Moffat, 222 Fourth Avenue, New York; Business Manager,

Thomas H. Beck, 52 East 19th Street, New York. (2) That the owners

are: American Lithographic Company, 52 East 19th Street, New York; C.

Eddy, L. Ettlinger, J. P. Knapp, C. K. Mills, 52 East 19th Street,

New York; M. C. Herczog, 28 West 10th Street, New York; William T.

Harris, Villa Nova, Pa.; Mrs. M. E. Heppenheimer, 51 East 58th Street,

New York; Emilie Schumacher, Executrix for Luise E. Schumacher and

Walter L. Schumacher, Mount Vernon, N. Y.; Samuel Untermyer, 120

Broadway, New York. (3) That the known bondholders, mortgagees, and

other security holders owning or holding 1 per cent. or more of total

amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities, are: None. (4)

That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners,

stockholders, and security holders, if any, contain not only the list

of stockholders and security holders as they appear upon the books

of the Company, but also, in cases where the stockholder or security

holder appears upon the books of the Company as trustee or in any other

fiduciary relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom

such trustee is acting, is given; also that the said two paragraphs

contain statements embracing affiant's full knowledge and belief as to

holders who do not appear upon the books of the Company as trustees,

hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of a bona fide

owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other person,

association, or corporation has any interest direct or indirect in

the said stock, bonds, or other securities than as so stated by him.

Thomas H. Beck, Publisher. Sworn to and subscribed before me this 18th

day of September, 1917. J. S. Campbell, Notary Public, Queens County.

Certificate filed in New York County. My commission expires March 30,

THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, Inc., 222 Fourth Avenue, New York, N. Y.

How the Mentor Club Service Helps Clubwomen and Women Who Wish to

The success and pleasure of a woman's club depends on the year's

program, which should be based on subjects that fascinate and interest,

The planning of an interesting and helpful club program is a difficult

matter, as you who have served on program committees know, and can

The Mentor Club Service Plans the Programs for Hundreds of Clubs, Free

The Mentor Service Editors, men and women of high intellectual

attainments and broad experience, will be glad at any time to help

_you_ with suggestions or a completely worked out plan for _your_ club

program, based on any desired subject. They will also supply lists of

reference books for help in the preparation of club papers, and will

be glad to assist further by procuring any necessary books not in your

Editor, The Mentor Association 222 Fourth Avenue, New York City

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Bolivia, vol. 5, Num. 18,