Flies to his place, nor rests, but in mid air

In manner at our will the affairs of Earth, 50

(At least, if so we can, and by the head 60

In this fair empire won of Earth and Air) -

His birth to our just fear gave no small cause;

'This is my Son beloved, - in him am pleased.'

And what will He not do to advance his Son?

When his fierce thunder drove us to the Deep; 90

Who this is we must learn, for Man he seems

He now shall know I can produce a man, 150

All his vast force, and drive him back to Hell -

The Law of God I read, and found it sweet;

Had measured twice six years, at our great Feast 210

O Son! but nourish them, and let them soar 230

Thou shouldst be great, and sit on David's throne, 240

Where they might see him; and to thee they came,

By whose bright course led on they found the place,

I am - this chiefly, that my way must lie

The Baptist (of whose birth I oft had heard, 270

Not knew by sight) now come, who was to come

Me him (for it was shewn him so from Heaven) -

But, as I rose out of the laving stream, 280

He was well pleased: by which I knew the time

And now by some strong motion I am led 290

And he still on was led, but with such thoughts

Among wild beasts. They at his sight grew mild, 310

Perused him, then with words thus uttered spake: - 320

"Sir, what ill chance hath brought thee to this place,

So far from path or road of men, who pass

For that to me thou seem'st the man whom late

Of God. I saw and heard, for we sometimes 330

To whom the Son of God: - "Who brought me hither

More than the camel, and to drink go far - 340

That out of these hard stones be made thee bread;

"Think'st thou such force in bread? Is it not written

Knowing who I am, as I know who thou art?"

Or range in the Air; nor from the Heaven of Heavens

For what he bids I do. Though I have lost

I lost not what I lost; rather by them 390

I gained what I have gained, and with them dwell

At first it may be; but, long since with woe

This wounds me most (what can it less?) that Man,

So never more in Hell than when in Heaven. 420

To thee not known, whence hast thou then thy truth,

At least in vain, for they shall find thee mute.

If it may stand him more in stead to lie,

Hard are the ways of truth, and rough to walk,

To hear thee when I come (since no man comes),

And now wild beasts came forth the woods to roam.

And with him talked, and with him lodged - I mean

And for a time caught up to God, as once

Hath rapt him from us? will he now retire 40

But let us wait; thus far He hath performed -

Let us be glad of this, and all our fears

Mock us with his blest sight, then snatch him hence:

Some troubled thoughts, which she in sighs thus clad: -

I lost him, but so found as well I saw

All his great work to come before him set -

(So may we hold our place and these mild seats

And made him bow, to the gods of his wives."

Too long - then lay'st thy scapes on names adored,

Where still, from shade to shade, the Son of God,

"Where will this end? Four times ten days I have passed

It was the hour of night, when thus the Son 260

As one in city or court or palace bred, 300

And with fair speech these words to him addressed: -

They all had need; I, as thou seest, have none."

"Tell me, if food were now before thee set, 320

He spake no dream; for, as his words had end,

And savour - beasts of chase, or fowl of game,

"What doubts the Son of God to sit and eat?

All these are Spirits of air, and woods, and springs,

What doubt'st thou, Son of God? Sit down and eat."

"Said'st thou not that to all things I had right?

And who withholds my power that right to use? 380

I can at will, doubt not, as soon as thou,

And all thy heart is set on high designs, 410

And what in me seems wanting but that I 450

And oft by force - which to a generous mind

And for thy reason why they should be sought -

"I see thou know'st what is of use to know,

What best to say canst say, to do canst do;

To thy large heart give utterance due; thy heart 10

The more he grew in years, the more inflamed 40

And know not whom, but as one leads the other;

Of whom to be dispraised were no small praise -

This is true glory and renown - when God, 60

To things not glorious, men not worthy of fame. 70

One is the son of Jove, of Mars the other;

Yet, if for fame and glory aught be done, 100

But why should man seek glory, who of his own

With guilt of his own sin - for he himself,

"Of glory, as thou wilt," said he, "so deem; 150

Rein then; what canst thou better do the while?" 180

And time there is for all things, Truth hath said.

"Let that come when it comes. All hope is lost

For where no hope is left is left no fear.

I would be at the worst; worst is my port,

Reign or reign not - though to that gentle brow

(Whose ire I dread more than the fire of Hell) 220

If I, then, to the worst that can be haste,

Why move thy feet so slow to what is best?

The world thou hast not seen, much less her glory,

But I will bring thee where thou soon shalt quit

The monarchies of the Earth, their pomp and state -

With that (such power was given him then), he took

With herds the pasture thronged, with flocks the hills; 260

And just in time thou com'st to have a view

To what end I have brought thee hither, and shew 350

Choose which thou wilt, by conquest or by league. 370

Before mine eyes thou hast set, and in my ear 390

My time, I told thee (and that time for thee

When that comes, think not thou to find me slack

But whence to thee this zeal? Where was it then

To his due time and providence I leave them." 440

That sleeked his tongue, and won so much on Eve,

The strength he was to cope with, or his own.

But - as a man who had been matchless held 10

(Vain battery!) and in froth or bubbles end - 20

That screened the fruits of the earth and seats of men 30

Thence to the gates cast round thine eye, and see

This Emperor hath no son, and now is old, 90

And with my help thou may'st; to me the power

Is given, and by that right I give it thee.

Much less my mind; though thou should'st add to tell

And studs of pearl - to me should'st tell, who thirst 120

For him I was not sent, nor yet to free

Means there shall be to this; but what the means

Is not for thee to know, nor me to tell."

Nor what I part with mean to give for naught,

(For, given to me, I give to whom I please),

If given, by whom but by the King of kings,

Long since. Wert thou so void of fear or shame

As offer them to me, the Son of God - 190

Though Sons of God both Angels are and Men -

The kingdoms of this world; I shall no more 210

Built nobly, pure the air and light the soil -

"Think not but that I know these things; or, think

Which, when he lists, he leaves, or boasts he can;

(Such are from God inspired, not such from thee); 350

Quite at a loss (for all his darts were spent),

Which would have set thee in short time with ease

Now at full age, fulness of time, thy season, 380

Or heaven write aught of fate - by what the stars

So saying, he took (for still he knew his power

Brought back, the Son of God, and left him there,

'Gan thunder, and both ends of heaven; the clouds 410

Had cheered the face of earth, and dried the wet

Backed on the north and west by a thick wood;

And in a careless mood thus to him said: - 450

All to the push of fate, pursue thy way 470

Not when it must, but when it may be best.

So talked he, while the Son of God went on,

And staid not, but in brief him answered thus: -

At least might seem to hold all power of thee,

To whom the Fiend, now swoln with rage, replied: -

For Son of God to me is yet in doubt.

All men are Sons of God; yet thee I thought 520

To win him, or win from him what I can. 530

To try thee, sift thee, and confess have found thee

To the utmost of mere man both wise and good,

Worth naming the Son of God by voice from Heaven,

The Son of God, and added thus in scorn: - 550

'Tempt not the Lord thy God.'" He said, and stood;

That once found out and solved, for grief and spite

Who durst so proudly tempt the Son of God. 580

Or lightning, thou shalt fall from Heaven, trod down 620

And beg to hide them in a herd of swine, 630

Hail, Son of the Most High, heir of both Worlds,