Pragmatism
Pragmatism is a philosophical tradition that – very broadly
– understands knowing the world as inseparable from agency
within it. This general idea has attracted a remarkably rich and at
times contrary range of interpretations, including: that all
philosophical concepts should be tested via scientific
experimentation, that a claim is true if and only if it is useful
(relatedly: if a philosophical theory does not contribute directly to
social progress then it is not worth much), that experience consists
in transacting with rather than representing nature, that articulate
language rests on a deep bed of shared human practices that can never
be fully ‘made explicit’. After a brief historical survey,
the first part of this entry explores the classical pragmatists’
distinctive methods, and how they give rise to an original
posteriori
epistemology. After that, we briefly explore some of
the many other areas of philosophy in which rich pragmatist
contributions have been made, both in pragmatism’s classical era
and the present day.
1. The Development of Pragmatism
1.1 The Early Years
1.2 ‘Neopragmatism’ and Beyond
2. The Meaning of Pragmatism
2.1 Peirce: The Pragmatic Maxim
2.2 James
3. Pragmatist Theories of Truth
3.1 Peirce on Truth and Reality
3.2 James on Truth
4. Pragmatist Epistemology
4.1 Skepticism versus Fallibilism
4.2 Inquiry
4.3 Pragmatist Conceptions of Experience
4.4 Representations
5. Pragmatism’s Contribution in Other Areas of Philosophy
5.1 Philosophy of Religion
5.2 Ethical and Political Philosophy
5.3 Aesthetics
5.4 Philosophy of Education
Primary Texts of the Classical Pragmatists
Collections of Papers by Classic and Contemporary Pragmatists.
Other References and Supplementary Reading
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. The Development of Pragmatism
1.1 The Early Years
Pragmatism originated in the United States around 1870, and now
presents a growing third alternative to both analytic and
‘Continental’ philosophical traditions worldwide. Its
first generation was initiated by the so-called ‘classical
pragmatists’ Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), who first
defined and defended the view, and his close friend and colleague
William James (1842–1910), who further developed and ably
popularized it. James’ Harvard colleague Josiah Royce
(1855–1916), although officially allied with absolute idealism,
proved a valuable interlocutor for many of these ideas, and as he
increasingly came to be influenced by Peirce’s work on signs and
the community of inquirers, was acknowledged as a fellow pragmatist by
Peirce himself. A significant influence in those early years was the
scientific revolution then taking place around evolutionary theory, of
which first generation pragmatists were keen observers and sometime
participants (Pearce 2020). These pragmatists focused significantly on
theorising inquiry, meaning and the nature of truth, although James
put these themes to work exploring truth in religion.
A second (still termed ‘classical’) generation turned
pragmatist philosophy more explicitly towards politics, education and
other dimensions of social improvement, under the immense influence of
John Dewey (1859–1952) and his friend Jane Addams
(1860–1935) – who invented the profession of social work
as an expression of pragmatist ideas, and was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1931. At the same time, new philosophies of race were
germinated by pioneering African-American philosophers W.E.B Du Bois
(1868–1963) and Alain Locke (1885–1954), who also engaged
in productive dialogue with one another. Further valuable
contributions were made at this time by George Herbert Mead
(1863–1931), who contributed significantly to the social
sciences, developing pragmatist perspectives on the relations between
the self and the community (Mead 1934), and Mary Parker Follett who
studied with Royce and James at Radcliffe/Harvard, and also critiqued
prevailing individualist ontologies, developing a concept of
“power-with” rather than “power-over” in
institutional settings (Follett 1918; 1924), whose farsightedness has
recently been recognised (Kaag 2011).
As the progressive Deweyan ‘New Deal’ era passed away and
the US moved into the Cold War, pragmatism’s influence was
challenged, as analytic philosophy blossomed and became the dominant
methodological orientation in most Anglo-American philosophy
departments. Transitional or ‘third generation’ figures
included C.I. Lewis (1883–1964), the teacher of W.V.O. Quine
(1908–2000) and several generations of Harvard philosophers.
Lewis developed a philosophy that was a sort of pragmatist Kantianism,
and in books such as
Mind and the World Order
(1929), he
defended a pragmatist conception of the
a priori
, holding that
our choices of laws of logic and systems of classification should be
determined by pragmatic criteria (Lewis 1923, 1929; Murphey 2005: ch.
four and five). Although Lewis and Quine developed a number of
pragmatist themes, their analytic allegiance may be seen in their
significant focus on theory of knowledge as first philosophy (which
Dewey deprecated as ‘the epistemological industry’).
It would be wrong to conclude that pragmatism was restricted to the
United States. There were pragmatists in Oxford, in France and,
especially, in Italy in the early years of the twentieth century
(Thayer 1968, part III, Baldwin 2003: 88–9). The work of Frank
Ramsey at Cambridge in the 1920s (e.g. Ramsey 1926) developed
Peirce’s views on statistical reasoning and inquiry in ways that
inspired fertile new research programmes (Misak 2018).
Wittgenstein’s later thought also acquired a pragmatist flavour
through conversations with Ramsey (Misak 2018; Boncompagni 2016;
Goodman 2002), and his reading of James’s
Varieties of
Religious Experience
(1902).
1.2 ‘Neopragmatism’ and Beyond
Since the 1970s, the pragmatist tradition has undergone a significant
revival. Richard Rorty (1931–2007) turned consciously to
pragmatism to rectify what he saw as mainstream epistemology’s
crucial mistake: naively conceiving of language and thought as
‘mirroring’ the world. Rorty’s bold and iconoclastic
attacks on this ‘representationalism’ birthed a so-called
neopragmatism
to which a number of influential recent
philosophers have contributed. Where early pragmatists such as Peirce
and Dewey created systematic philosophies, Rorty treated pragmatism as
a more critical or therapeutic philosophical project. What pragmatists
teach us about
truth
, he tells us, is that there is nothing
very systematic or constructive to be said about it. In particular,
the concept does not capture any metaphysical relation between our
beliefs and utterances, on the one hand, and reality on the other. We
can describe what we
with the word ‘true’: we
use it to endorse beliefs and sentences, and sometimes we might find
it useful to express our fallibility by saying that some of our
beliefs may not be true. (Rorty calls this the
‘cautionary’ use of the term ‘true’.) But
beyond talking about the concept’s rather trivial formal
properties, there is nothing more to be said about it. Nor can truth
be our aim when we inquire, since we can only adopt an aim that we can
recognize has been achieved, but since we are fallible, we can never
prove that our beliefs are true – only that they meet standards
of acceptance that are endorsed, for the time being, in our community
(Rorty 1982; 1991; 1998). Therefore we are free to propose new
‘vocabularies’ – systems of classification and
description. We do not test these vocabularies by seeing whether they
can be ‘read off the nature of reality’, but by seeing how
they enable us to achieve our current goals, formulate better and more
satisfying goals, and become better at being human.
Another key contributor to pragmatism’s revival was Harvard
philosopher Hilary Putnam, who at times made ambitious claims for the
prospects of a ‘pragmatist enlightenment’(Putnam 2004:
89–108. For a more recent articulation of similar sentiments,
see Kitcher 2012). Putnam identifies four key characteristics of
pragmatism as: i) rejection of skepticism, ii) willingness to embrace
fallibilism, iii) rejection of dichotomies such as fact/value,
mind/body, analytic/synthetic, iv) what he calls ‘the primacy of
practice’ (Putnam 1993; 1994).
Further pragmatist revival may be found in the work of Robert Brandom.
Brandom’s philosophical interests are rather different from
those of the classical pragmatists, of whom he is quite critical
(Brandom 2011). His views owe more to philosophers such as Wilfrid
Sellars and Quine, his teacher Rorty, and historical readings in
thinkers such as Kant and Hegel. His concerns lie mostly with
semantics and the philosophy of language. By contrast to the
representationalism deplored by Rorty, he develops a version of
inferentialist
semantics, in order to construct accounts of our
use of words like ‘true’ and ‘refers to’ which
are liberated from the idea that the function of thought and language
is ‘to provide a transcript of reality’. The connection to
pragmatism is his focus on what we
with our practices of
making assertions and evaluating the assertions of others. What
constitutes an assertion is its
normative pragmatics
: it is the
smallest unit of language for which we can take responsibility within
a ‘game of giving and asking for reasons’. Logical
relations are explicated as entitlements to make further moves in this
‘language-game’, which flow from the commitments one has
assumed through one’s previous assertions (Brandom 1994; 2000).
Brandom also joins the pragmatists in denying that
truth
is a
substantial property, and in seeking to construct an account of
reference which makes a difference in practice (his favored strategy
is, broadly, explaining language-users’ anaphoric capacities).
In (Brandom 2008) he goes further to discuss how different
vocabularies understood pragmatically might be translated into –
or reduced to – one another, thereby constructing an overall
account of the relationship between ‘saying’ and
‘doing’ that he offers as a basis for reintegrating
analytic and pragmatist philosophy. Brandom’s research program
has inspired a new generation of philosophers to fruitfully combine
Sellarsian and pragmatist ideas (e.g. Price 2013; Sachs 2015; Levine
2019; Stovall 2021).
Another notable recent foray into pragmatist-inspired normative
pragmatics is found in the work of Jürgen Habermas, a philosopher
from the Frankfurt School who has engaged with unparalleled breadth
across the landscape of 20th century philosophy. He manages to combine
analytic philosophers’ goal of systematically theorising
language with a neo-Marxian and hermeneutic critique of modernity,
whilst drawing on Mead’s pragmatist analysis of the self as
irremediably social. His central concept of
communicative
action
(Habermas 1981) is advocated as a foil to the
instrumentalist rationality that he takes to be rampantly colonising
the human ‘lifeworld’ under capitalism. The
discourse ethics
which he develops in order to scaffold an authentic communicative
action that is free from the distortions of power and ideology owes
much to pragmatism’s concept of the community of inquiry,
although he is sceptical of Peirce’s inquiry-based analysis of
truth as overly idealised (Habermas 2003). With major contributions in
political philosophy, ethics, philosophy of law, aesthetics and
philosophy of religion, amongst other areas, Habermas’ influence
has reached far into the social sciences – something Dewey would
likely have approved.
Meanwhile, a number of self-described pragmatists have objected to
certain tenets of neopragmatism, particularly Rorty’s blithe
dismissal of truth as a topic better left undiscussed (Rorty 1982),
and have sought to rehabilitate classical pragmatist ideals of
objectivity. (Examples include Susan Haack, Christopher Hookway and
Cheryl Misak.) These philosophers are now sometimes referred to as
New Pragmatists
. Yet others have worked to place pragmatist
ideas in a broader Western philosophical context, for instance tracing
Peirce’s significant debt to Kant (Apel 1974, Gava 2014), and
connections between pragmatism and 19th century idealism (Margolis
2010, Stern 2009). Meanwhile, classical pragmatism’s progressive
social ideals lived on in some quarters, with notable contributions to
philosophy of race made by Cornel West, who advanced a
prophetic
pragmatism
drawing on both Christian and Marxian thought, and
showcasing the earlier contributions of Du Bois and Locke (e.g. West
1989), while Shannon Sullivan has been a pioneer in ‘whiteness
studies’ (Sullivan 2006). A number of other liberatory
philosophical projects in areas such as feminism (Seigfried 1996),
disability studies (Keith and Keith 2013), medical ethics (Hester
2001), ecology (Norton 1994; 2005, Alexander 2013), Native American
philosophy (Pratt 2002) and Latin American philosophy (Pappas 1998)
also currently look to the pragmatist tradition as their philosophical
home. Pragmatists have also made significant recent contributions to
legal philosophy (Sullivan 2007).
Meanwhile, increasingly pragmatism’s intellectual centre of
gravity is moving out of North America, with vibrant research networks
appearing in South America, Scandinavia and more recently central
Europe and China.
2. The Meaning of Pragmatism
Pragmatism’s key ideas originated in discussions at a so-called
‘Metaphysical Club’ that met in Harvard around 1870. (For
a popular history of this group, see Menand 1998.) Peirce and James
participated in these discussions along with some other philosophers,
psychologists and philosophically inclined lawyers. Peirce then
developed these ideas in publications from the 1870s, and they
achieved prominence through a series of public lectures given by James
in 1898. Both James and Peirce used ‘pragmatism’ as the
name of a method, principle, or ‘maxim’ for clarifying
concepts and hypotheses and for identifying empty disputes, though we
shall see significant differences in how they understood it.
The core of pragmatism as Peirce originally conceived it was the
Pragmatic Maxim, a rule for clarifying the meaning of hypotheses by
tracing their implications for experience in specific situations. For
Peirce and James, a key application of the Maxim was clarifying the
concept of
truth
. This produced a distinctive epistemological
outlook: a fallibilist, anti-Cartesian explication of the norms that
govern inquiry. Within that broad outlook, though, early pragmatists
split significantly over questions of
realism
broadly conceived
– essentially, whether pragmatism should conceive itself as a
scientific philosophy holding monism about truth (following Peirce),
or a more broad-based alethic pluralism (following James and Dewey).
This dispute was poignantly emblematized in arguments between Peirce
and James which led Peirce to rename his view
pragmaticism
presenting this clarified viewpoint to the world as his new
‘baby’ which was, he hoped, ‘ugly enough to be safe
from kidnappers’ (EP2: 355).
2.1 Peirce: The Pragmatic Maxim
Peirce made this canonical statement of his Pragmatic Maxim in 1878 in
‘How to Make our Ideas Clear’:
Consider what effects, which might conceivably have practical
bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our
conception of those effects is the whole of our conception of the
object. (EP1: 132)
This offers a distinctive method for clarifying the meaning of
concepts and the hypotheses which contain them, by identifying the
practical consequences we should expect if a given hypothesis is true.
This maxim raises some questions. First: what sort of thing does it
recognize as a practical consequence? Second, what use does such a
maxim have? Peirce’s first simple illustrative example urges
that what we mean by calling something
hard
is that ‘it
will not be scratched by many other substances.’ In this way,
then, I can use the concept
hard
in certain contexts when I
am wondering what to do, and absent such contexts, the concept is
empty. The principle has something of a verificationist character:
‘our idea of anything
our idea of its sensible
effects’ (EP1: 132). However the use of the phrase
‘practical consequences’ suggests that these are to be
understood as having implications for what we will or should
. This is clear from Peirce’s later formulations, for
example:
The entire intellectual purport of any symbol consists in the total of
all general modes of rational conduct which, conditionally upon all
the possible different circumstances and desires, would ensue upon the
acceptance of the symbol. (EP2: 346).
So, for instance, if I want to break a window by throwing an object
through it, that object needs to be hard. It is important that, as
Peirce hints here, the consequences we are concerned with are
general and intelligible
: we are to look for laws that govern
the behaviour of hard things, and draw on them to develop behaviours
which advance our goals now and in the future.
James sometimes writes as if the practical consequences of a
proposition can simply be effects upon the individual believer: if
religious belief makes me feel better, then that contributes to the
pragmatic clarification of ‘God exists’. Peirce saw uses
for his maxim beyond those James had in mind. He insisted that it was
logical
principle, in a broad sense which includes
scientific methodology. So for instance he used it to clarify concepts
central to scientific reasoning such as
probability
truth
, and
reality
. Pragmatism, described by Peirce
as a ‘laboratory philosophy’, shows us how we test
theories by carrying out experiments in the expectation that if the
hypothesis is not true, then the experiment will fail to have some
predetermined sensible effect.
Peirce’s description of his maxim as a logical principle is
reflected in passages where he presents it as a development of a
distinction that had been a staple of traditional logic texts, and
familiar to readers of Descartes, between ideas that are
clear
and
distinct
(EP1: 126f). Peirce understood
the first grade of clarity about the meaning of a concept to consist
in the ability to identify instances of it, without necessarily being
able to say how. He then took his philosophical contemporaries to hold
that the highest grade of clarity, distinctness, is obtained when we
can analyze a concept into its elements by providing a verbal
definition (or, in more recent terminology, necessary and sufficient
conditions for its application). Peirce complained that ‘nothing
new is ever learned by analyzing definitions’, unless we already
have a clear understanding of the defining terms. He therefore
announced that the Pragmatic Maxim enabled a higher
(‘third’) grade of clarity, that supplemented the verbal
definition with a description of how the concept is employed in
practice.
As well as treating the Pragmatic Maxim as part of a constructive
account of the norms that govern inquiry, Peirce, like James, gave it
a negative role as a tool for demonstrating the emptiness of
priori
metaphysics. In section 3.1 we shall see how pragmatic
clarification of
reality
may be used to undermine a flawed
‘nominalistic’ conception of reality that led to the
‘copy theory of truth’, problematic Cartesian
certainty-seeking strategies in epistemology, and Kant’s concept
of a ‘thing in itself’. A more vivid non-logical example
of using the maxim to undermine spurious metaphysical ideas was
Peirce’s early argument that the Catholic understanding of
transubstantiation was empty and incoherent, since to talk of
something as having all the sensible characters of wine, yet being in
reality blood, is senseless jargon’ (EP1: 131f). It is important
to note, however, that the Maxim is in the end only a tool for
clarifying meaning; not Peirce’s theory of meaning proper. This
is to be found in his theory of signs or
semiotic
, discussed
below (4.4).
2.2 James
When William James published a series of lectures on
‘Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking’ in
1907, he began by identifying ‘The Present Dilemma in
Philosophy’ (1907: 9ff), a fundamental and apparently
irresoluble clash between two ways of thinking, which he promised
pragmatism would overcome. James begins by observing that the history
of philosophy is ‘to a great extent that of a certain clash of
human temperaments’: the ‘tough-minded’ and the
‘tender-minded’. The tough-minded have an empiricist
commitment to experience and going by ‘the facts’, while
the tender-minded prefer
a priori
principles which appeal to
ratiocination. The tender-minded tend to be idealistic, optimistic and
religious, believing in free will, while the tough-minded are
materialist, pessimistic, irreligious, dogmatic and fatalistic.
By the early twentieth century, James notes, ‘our children
… are almost born scientific’ (1907: 14f). But this has
not weakened religious belief. People need a philosophy that is both
empiricist in its adherence to facts yet finds room for faith. The
challenge is to show how to reconcile ‘the scientific loyalty to
facts’ with ‘the old confidence in human values and the
resultant spontaneity, whether of the religious or of the romantic
type.’ Pragmatism is presented as the ‘mediating
philosophy’. Once we use the ‘pragmatic method’ to
clarify our understanding of truth, of free will, or of religious
belief the disputes – which we despaired of settling
intellectually – begin to dissolve. William James thus presented
pragmatism as a ‘method for settling metaphysical disputes that
might otherwise be interminable.’ (1907: 28) Unless some
‘practical difference’ would follow from one or the other
side’s being correct, the dispute is idle.
[T]he tangible fact at the root of all our thought-distinctions,
however subtle, is that there is no one of them so fine as to consist
in anything but a possible difference of practice. To attain perfect
clearness in our thoughts of an object, then, we need only consider
what conceivable effects of a practical kind the object may involve
– what sensations we are to expect from it, and what reactions
we must prepare. (1907: 29)
The lectures explained this with a memorable illustration. On a visit
to the mountains, James’ friends engage in a ‘ferocious
metaphysical dispute’ about a squirrel that was hanging on one
side of a tree trunk while a human observer was standing on the other
side:
This human witness tries to get sight of the squirrel by moving
rapidly round the tree, but no matter how fast he goes, the squirrel
moves as fast in the opposite direction … so that never a
glimpse of him is caught. The resultant metaphysical problem now is
this:
Does the man go round the squirrel or not?
(1907: 27f)
James proposed that which answer is correct depends on what you
‘practically mean’ by ‘going round’. If you
mean passing from north of the squirrel, east, south, then west, then
the answer is ‘yes’. If, on the other hand, you mean in
front of him, to his right, behind him, to his left, and then in front
of him again, then the answer is ‘no’. After pragmatic
clarification disambiguates the question, all dispute comes to an end.
So James offers his pragmatism as a technique for clarifying concepts
and hypotheses so that metaphysical disputes that appear irresoluble
will be dissolved. A good example is the dispute between free will and
determinism: once we compare the practical consequences of both
positions we find no conflict.
As James admitted, he explained the pragmatic method through examples
rather than a detailed analysis of what it involves. He did little to
explain exactly what ‘practical consequences’ are. He also
made no claim to originality: ‘Pragmatism represents a perfectly
familiar attitude in philosophy, the empiricist attitude’,
although he acknowledged that it did so ‘in a more radical and
in a less objectionable form than it has ever yet assumed’
(1907: 31). It shared with other forms of empiricism an
‘anti-intellectualist tendency’ (ibid), and it recognized
that theories (and presumably concepts) should be viewed as
‘instruments, not answers to enigmas’.
3. Pragmatist Theories of Truth
Peirce and James differed in how they applied their respective
pragmatisms to clarifying the concept of
truth
Peirce’s account of truth is presented as a means to
understanding a concept that he claimed was vital for the method of
science:
reality
(3.1). James used his account to defend
pluralism about truth (3.2).
3.1 Peirce on Truth and Reality
The final section of ‘How to Make our Ideas Clear’
addresses the concept of
reality
. This concept seems clear:
‘every child uses it with perfect confidence...’ Thus it
reaches Peirce’s first level of meaning-clarity. A second-level
verbal definition is also readily forthcoming: ‘we may define
the real as that whose characters are independent of what anybody may
think them to be.’ But, Peirce announces, if our idea of reality
is to be ‘perfectly clear’, we need to apply the Pragmatic
Maxim. At this stage the concept of
truth
enters the
discussion: Peirce claims that the object represented in a true
proposition is our best understanding of the real. So we must turn to
his remarks about truth to see how this works.
His pragmatic clarification of truth is expressed as follows:
The opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all who
investigate, is what we mean by the truth, and the object represented
in this opinion is the real. That is the way I would explain reality.
(EP1: 139)
Seven years earlier, in a review of a new edition of the writings of
Berkeley, Peirce had described this way of thinking as the
‘realist conception of reality’ (EP1:88–9), in
contrast with a ‘nominalist conception of reality’ which
many early modern philosophers took for granted. Nominalists assume
that the real can only be the antecedent cause of singular sensations
which provide our evidence for beliefs about the external world. This
naturally leads to a certain (age-old) solipsistic skepticism
concerning whether a person can gain knowledge that transcends their
own perceptions and epistemic perspective. Peirce’s pragmatist
clarification of truth offers an alternative conceptualization of
‘being constrained by reality’, in terms of
consequent
convergence of opinion, through the process of
inquiry, rather than as an
antecedent
cause of sensations.
All this has led Peirce’s account of truth to be expressed in
the slogan:
truth is the end of inquiry
, where
‘end’ is to be understood not as a ‘finish’
(some point in time when all human questions will be settled) but as a
goal, telos or final cause. This original understanding of truth has
faced challenges that it is ‘too realist’ insofar as it
takes for granted that inquiry will converge on just one answer to any
given question. Here Bertrand Russell asked, ‘Is this an
empirical generalization from the history of research? Or is it an
optimistic belief in the perfectibility of man?’, concluding,
‘Whatever interpretation we adopt, we seem committed to some
very rash assertion.’ (1939: 146). Similarly, Quine wrote,
‘…we have no reason to suppose that man’s surface
irritations even unto eternity admit of any one systematization that
is scientifically better or simpler than all possible others’
(1960: 23). However, later in life Peirce urged that the hypothesis of
monistic convergence is best viewed as a
regulative hope
. In
1908, Peirce wrote to a friend, ‘I do not say that it is
infallibly true that there is any belief to which a person would come
if he were to carry his inquiries far enough. I only say that that
alone is what I call Truth’ (cited Haack 1976: 246).
At the same time, others have criticised Peirce’s account of
truth for not being realist enough, due to its ‘internal
realist’ definition of truth in terms of belief and inquiry. Can
there not be claims which no-one ever inquires into or believes, which
are nonetheless true? What about ‘lost facts’, such as the
number of cakes on a tray during a long-ago party? Here Peirce
arguably doubles down on his fallibilism (Legg 2014: 211). How can we
be sure that no amount of inquiry will settle such matters?
… it is unphilosophical to suppose that, with regard to any
given question (which has any clear meaning), investigation would not
bring forth a solution of it, if it were carried far enough…
Who can be sure of what we shall not know in a few hundred years?
(EP1: 140)
The objectivism of Peirce’s account of truth derives not from a
world entirely external to our minds (a famously difficult thing to
know), but from the
potential infinity
of the community of
inquiry, which exposes all of our beliefs to future correction:
‘reality is independent, not necessarily of thought in general,
but only of what you or I or any finite number of [persons] may think
about it…’ (EP1: 139). By means of this mathematical
analysis, Peirce deftly synthesises insights from traditional realisms
and idealisms (Legg 2014: 212; Lane 2018).
3.2 James on Truth
James departed from Peirce in claiming that pragmatism was itself a
theory of truth, and his writings on this topic rapidly became
notorious. They are characteristically lively, offering contrasting
formulations, engaging slogans, and intriguing claims which often seem
to fly in the face of common sense. In his own words:
The true is the name of whatever proves itself to be good in the way
of belief, and good, too, for definite assignable reasons. (1907: 42)
The true’, to put it very briefly, is only the
expedient in the way of our thinking, just as ‘the right’
is only the expedient in the way of our behaving.
Expedient in
almost any fashion; and expedient in the long run and on the whole, of
course. (1907: 106)
Other formulations fill this out by giving a central role to
experience:
Ideas … become true just in so far as they help us to get into
satisfactory relation with other parts of our experience. (1907: 34)
Any idea upon which we can ride …; any idea that will carry us
prosperously from any one part of our experience to any other part,
linking things satisfactorily, working securely, saving labor; is true
for just so much, true in so far forth,
true instrumentally
(1907: 34)
This might be taken to suggest that beliefs are made true by the fact
that they enable us to make accurate predictions of the future run of
experience, but other passages suggest that the ‘goodness of
belief’ can take other forms. James assures us that it can
contribute to the truth of a theological proposition that it has
‘a value for concrete life’ (1907: 40); and this can occur
because the idea of God possesses a majesty which can ‘yield
religious comfort to a most respectable class of minds’
(1907:40). This suggests that a belief can be made true by the fact
that holding it contributes to our happiness and fulfilment. Such
passages may seem to support Bertrand Russell’s famous objection
that James is committed to the truth of “Santa Claus
exists” (Russell 1946: 772). This is unfair; at best, James
holds that the happiness that belief in Santa Claus provides is
truth-relevant
. He might call the belief ‘good for so
much’ but it would only be ‘wholly true’ if it did
not ‘clash with other vital benefits’. It is easy to see
how, unless it is somehow insulated from the broader effects of acting
upon it, belief in Santa Claus could lead to many surprising and
disappointing experiences.
4. Pragmatist Epistemology
The pragmatists saw their epistemology as providing a return to common
sense and experience, rejecting a flawed philosophical heritage which
had distorted the work of earlier thinkers. The errors to be overcome
include Cartesianism, nominalism, and the ‘copy theory of
truth’: these are all related.
4.1 Skepticism versus Fallibilism
The roots of pragmatism’s anti-skepticism can be found in
Peirce’s early (1868) paper ‘Some Consequences of Four
Incapacities’ (EP1: 28–30). Here he identifies
‘Cartesianism’ as a philosophical pathology that lost
sight of certain insights that were fundamental to scholastic thought
(for all its faults), and – he argued – more suited to the
philosophical needs of his own time. The paper begins by identifying
four problematic teachings of modern philosophy:
One can and should doubt all one’s beliefs at once.
The ultimate test of certainty lies in individual
consciousness.
The ‘multiform argumentation’ characteristic of the
Middle Ages should be replaced by a single chain of inference.
Where scholasticism consciously limited its explanatory capacity
(purporting to explain only ‘all created things’),
ironically, Cartesianism’s stated ambition to explain everything
renders its own presuppositions hidden, mysterious and philosophically
dangerous.
The first, and most important of these Cartesian teachings was the
method of universal doubt, whereby we should retain only beliefs that
are absolutely certain. The test of this certainty, as Peirce next
points out, lies in whether the individual consciousness is satisfied.
Importantly, this self-examination includes reflection on hypothetical
possibilities: we cannot trust our perceptual beliefs, for example,
because we cannot rule out that they might be produced by a dream, or
an evil demon. (See Hookway 2012, ch. 2,3.) The initial pragmatist
response is that this is a strategy that in practice we cannot carry
out effectively, and there is no reason to adopt it anyway. Peirce
claims that any attempt to adopt the method of doubt will be an
exercise in self-deception because we possess a variety of certainties
which it does not occur to us
can
be questioned. So there
will be no ‘real doubt’; these beliefs will lurk in the
background, influencing our reflection. Peirce urges us not to
‘pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our
hearts’ (EP1: 29).
It is necessary to separate some different threads in this argument.
First, there is something unnatural about the Cartesian strategy.
Inquiries normally occur within a context: we address particular
questions or problems, relying on background certainties that it does
not occur to us to doubt. The Cartesian suggestion that we should
begin by trying to doubt everything appears to be an attempt to step
outside of this. Second, the Cartesian strategy requires us to reflect
upon each of our beliefs and ask what reason we have for holding it;
skeptical challenges are then used to question the adequacy of these
reasons. This is again at odds with normal practice. Many of our
familiar certainties are such that we cannot offer any concrete or
convincing reason for believing them. We tend to treat our established
beliefs as innocent until ‘proven guilty’. The mere lack
of a conclusive reason for belief does not itself provide a reason for
doubt.
Descartes, of course, might have conceded this, but responded that his
approach is required because once we allow error to enter our
belief-corpus we may be unable to escape from its damaging effects.
His was a time of methodological ferment, and he appreciated how many
false beliefs he himself had acquired from his teachers. The
pragmatist response here is to question some of Descartes’
assumptions about how we reason and form beliefs. First, his strategy
is individualist and ‘to make single individuals absolute judges
of truth is most pernicious’. Peirce noted that the natural
sciences which were so conspicuously successful in Descartes’
day took a very different approach:
In sciences in which men come to agreement, when a theory has been
broached, it is considered to be on probation until this agreement has
been reached. After it is reached, the question of certainty becomes
an idle one, because there is no one left who doubts it. We
individually cannot reasonably hope to attain the ultimate philosophy
which we pursue; we can only seek it, therefore, for the
community
of philosophers. (EP1: 29)
Peirce also questions Descartes’ understanding of reasoning in
holding that we may rely on ‘a single thread of inference’
that is no stronger than its weakest link:
Philosophy ought to imitate the successful sciences in its methods, so
far as to…trust rather to the multitude and variety of its
arguments than to the conclusiveness of any one. Its reasoning should
not form a chain which is no stronger than its weakest link, but a
cable whose fibres may be ever so slender, provided they are
sufficiently numerous and intimately connected. (EP1: 29)
Where the Cartesian holds that unless we begin from premises of which
we can be absolutely certain we may never reach the truth, the
pragmatist emphasises that, when we do go wrong, further discussion
and investigation can identify and eliminate errors, which is our best
hope for escaping their damaging effects. The possibility of error
provides us with reason to be ‘contrite fallibilists’, not
skeptics. The focus of epistemological inquiry should not be on
showing how we can possess
absolute certainty
, but on how we
can develop self-correcting methods of inquiry that make
fallible
progress
William James makes similar observations. In ‘The Will to
Believe’, he reminds us that we have two cognitive desiderata:
to obtain truth, and avoid error (James 1897: 30). The harder we try
to avoid error, the more likely we will miss out on truth; and
vice
versa
. The method of doubt
may
make sense in special cases
where enormous weight is given to avoiding error, but only there. Once
we recognize our practical and forced decision about the relative
importance of
two
goods, the Cartesian strategy no longer
appears the only rational one. Later, Dewey in
The Quest for
Certainty
similarly urged that a focus on eliminating all error
from our beliefs is both doomed and destructive, with the added twist
of a social diagnosis of the quest itself: the uncertainty, pain and
fear of much early human life led to the erection of
‘priestly’ forms of knowledge which, in promising to
intercede with Heavenly stability, sundered
a priori
theory
from
a posteriori
practice, thereby enabling the knowing
classes to insulate themselves from a more humble (and realistic)
empiricism. The ‘quest’ continues, however, in many
debates in contemporary mainstream epistemology.
4.2 Inquiry
Where much analytic epistemology centres around the concept of
knowledge
, considered as an idealised end-point of human
thought, pragmatist epistemology examines
inquiry
, considered
as the process of knowledge-seeking, and how we can improve it.
Pragmatist epistemologists often explore how we can inquire in a
self-controlled and fruitful way, offering rich accounts of capacities
or virtues that we must possess in order to inquire well, and rules or
guiding principles that we should adopt. A canonical account is
Peirce’s classic early paper “The Fixation of
Belief”. Here Peirce states that inquiry is a struggle to
replace doubt with ‘settled belief’, and that the only
method of inquiry that can make sense of the fact that at least some
of us are disturbed by inconsistent beliefs, and will subsequently
reflect upon which methods of fixing belief are
correct
the
Method of Science
, which draws on the Pragmatic Maxim
described above. This contrasts with three other methods of fixing
belief: i) refusing to consider evidence contrary to one’s
favored beliefs (the
Method of Tenacity
), ii) accepting an
institution’s dictates (the
Method of Authority
), iii)
developing the most rationally coherent or elegant-seeming belief-set
(the
A Priori Method
). Notable recent reinterpretations and
defenses of Peircean epistemology include (Haack 1993 and Cooke 2007).
(See also Skagestad 1981.)
Dewey’s conception of inquiry, found in his
Logic: the
Theory of Inquiry
is also rich, and arguably more radical than
Peirce’s in its underlying ontology (ED2: 169–79). Dewey
sees inquiry as beginning with a
problem
; it aims for
‘the controlled or directed transformation of an indeterminate
situation into one that is so determinate in its constituent
distinctions and relations as to convert the elements of the original
situation into a unified whole’ (ED2: 171). As John E. Smith
notes, where ‘Peirce aimed at “fixing” belief, Dewey
aimed at “fixing” the situation’ (1978: 98). It is
important to note that here the situation is
objectively
indeterminate, and is itself transformed by inquiry. The
‘pattern of inquiry’ that Dewey describes is common to the
information-gathering of animals, practical problem solving, common
sense investigations of our surroundings and scientific inquiry. He
recognizes that when we face a problem, our first task is to
understand it through describing its elements and identifying their
relations. Identifying a concrete question that we need to answer is a
sign that we are making progress. And the ‘logical forms’
we use in the course of inquiry are understood as ideal instruments,
tools that help us to transform things and resolve our problem. The
continuities Dewey finds between different kinds of inquiry are
evidence of his naturalism and his recognition that forms of
scientific investigation can guide us in all areas of our lives. All
the pragmatists, but most of all Dewey, challenge the sharp dichotomy
that other philosophers draw between theoretical beliefs and practical
deliberations. In some sense, all inquiry is practical, concerned with
transforming and evaluating the features of situations in which we
find ourselves. Shared inquiry directed at resolving social and
political problems or indeterminacies was also central to
Dewey’s conception of the good life and, relatedly, the
democratic ideal: more on this below.
4.3 Pragmatist Conceptions of Experience
The Pragmatic Maxim suggests that pragmatism is a form of
empiricism
(an idea recently explored further in Wilson 2016).
Yet most pragmatists adopted accounts of experience and perception
radically different from the views of mainstream empiricists from John
Locke and David Hume to Rudolf Carnap, as well as the
‘intuition’ posited by Kant. These empiricists interpreted
experience as what is sometimes (following C.I. Lewis and Wilfrid
Sellars) called ‘the given’: we are passive recipients of
determinate and singular ‘sense-data’. Experience provides
raw material for knowledge, but does not itself have content informed
by concepts, practical needs, or anything else non-sensory, and our
only contact with the external world is through receiving such
experiences. This way of thinking about experience can easily lead to
skepticism about the so-called ‘external world’.
In different ways, Peirce, James, and Dewey all argued that experience
is far richer than this, and earlier philosophers were mistaken to
claim that we could identify ‘experiences’ as antecedents
to, or separable constituents of, cognition. We can begin with
James’
radical empiricism
, of which he said that
‘the establishment of the pragmatist theory of truth [was] a
step of first-rate importance in making [it] prevail’ (1909:
6f). Its fundamental ‘postulate’ is that ‘the only
things that shall be debatable among philosophers shall be things
definable in terms drawn from experience’. But this requires
that experience be newly understood. He announced that ‘the
relations between things, conjunctive as well as disjunctive, are just
as much matters of direct particular experience as the things
themselves.’ Relatedly, ‘the parts of experience hold
together from next to next by relations that are themselves parts of
experience. The directly apprehended universe needs, in short, no
extraneous trans-empirical connective support, but possesses in its
own right a concatenated or continuous structure.’
Peirce too emphasizes the continuous character of perceptual
experience, adding that we directly perceive external things as
‘other’ to ourselves, that we can perceive necessary
connections between objects and events, and that experience contains
elements of generality (citing a picture of a connected series of
circles which can be seen
a stone wall, in the manner of
Wittgenstein’s famous duck-rabbit diagram). Around 1902–3,
Peirce developed a complex and original theory of perception which
combines a
percept
which is entirely non-cognitive, with a
perceptual judgement
which is structured propositionally and
lies in the space of reasons. In this way he seeks to capture how
perception is both immediately felt and truth-evaluable. In contrast
to standard British Empiricist analyses of the relation between
impressions and ideas, Peirce does not claim that a perceptual
judgment
copies
its percept. Rather, it
indexes
it, just
as a weather-cock indicates the direction of the wind. Although
percept and perceptual judgment are intrinsically dissimilar, over
time certain habits of association between the two are reinforced,
leading them to (literally) grow in our minds and link with other
habits. This enables percepts and perceptual judgments to mutually
inform and correct one another, to the point where every perception is
fallible and subject to reinterpretation in the light of future
perceptions (Rosenthal 1994; Wilson 2016). The end result is that, as
Peirce puts it, in stark contrast to the accepted understanding of
experience as ‘given’: ‘[n]othing at all…is
absolutely confrontitional’, although, ‘the
confrontitional is continually flowing in upon us’ (CP 7.653).
Dewey’s account of experience, which is central to his entire
philosophy, contributes an additional twist. Like Peirce, he thought
that experience was ‘full of inference’, but he arguably
took the notion further from the contents of individual consciousness
than any previous pragmatist. For Dewey, experience is a process
through which we transact with our surroundings and meet our
needs:
Like its congeners life and history, [experience] includes
what
men do and suffer,
what
they strive for, love, believe and
endure, and also
how
men act and are acted upon, the ways in
which they do and suffer, desire and enjoy, see, believe, imagine, in
short, processes of
experiencing
(LW1:18).
What we experience is shaped by our habits of expectation and there is
no basis for extracting from this complex process the kind of
‘thin given’ beloved of sense datum theorists. We
experience all sorts of objects, events and processes, and just as
experience is inextricable from the ‘external’ world of
things,
Nature
(its co-ordinate concept: what is experienced)
is inextricable from the ‘internal’ world of concepts.
In sharp contrast to Dewey, neopragmatism no longer takes experience
as an explicit philosophical theme. Rorty began his (pre-pragmatist)
philosophical career as an eliminative materialist, and the view
survives in
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
, newly
bolstered by Sellarsian concerns about the ‘myth of the
given’. On this basis, Rorty declares that ‘Dewey should
have dropped the term “experience” rather than redefining
it… He should have agreed with Peirce that a great gulf divides
sensation and cognition, [and] decided that cognition was possible
only for language users…’ (Rorty 1998: 297). Similarly,
Brandom focusses his attention exclusively on linguistic meaning
albeit
in this case
qua
rationalist rather than
empiricist), and has famously ruled that (as ‘blasphemy’
was to Oscar Wilde) ‘experience’ is ‘not one of his
words’ (Brandom 2011: 197). This neopragmatist neglect of one of
classical pragmatism’s central concepts has become a major point
of contention on the part of many New Pragmatists (e.g. Koopman 2007;
Levine 2010, 2012; Sachs 2015).
4.4 Representations
Having discussed pragmatists’ views on the activity of inquiry
and the thickness of experience, we turn to their accounts of the
nature of thought. It has been common for philosophers to assume that
the ‘content’ of a thought, judgment or proposition is a
kind of
intrinsic property
. Perhaps it offers a
‘picture’ or ‘idea’ of some state of affairs,
and we can identify this content simply by reflecting upon the item
itself, and its structural properties. All pragmatists have rejected
this idea as a key driver of an antinaturalistic
Cartesian
dualism
. Instead, they have held that the content of a thought,
judgment or proposition is a matter of the role it fills in our
activities of inquiry, and should be explained by reference to how we
interpret it or what we do with it. This shall be illustrated by
considering three particular pragmatist views.
First, all of the classic pragmatists identified beliefs and other
mental states as
habits
. According to Peirce, our beliefs
‘[g]uide our desires and shape our actions’ (EP1: 114).
The content of a belief is determined by its role in determining our
actions. This was reflected in Peirce’s formulations of his
Pragmatic Maxim. In order to be clear about the content of a concept
or hypothesis, we must reflect upon its role in determining what we
should do in the light of our desires and our background knowledge. In
Robert Brandom’s terminology, the philosopher ‘makes
explicit’ aspects of our practice that are implicit in our
habits and dispositions. The role of tacit habits of reasoning and
acting in fixing our beliefs and guiding our actions is a theme that
recurs in the work of the pragmatists, and is now finding strong
echoes in recent empirically informed work on ‘4E’
cognition, which is embodied, embedded, enactive and extended. (For an
accounts of this research area which explicitly engage classical
pragmatism, see Menary 2007 and Gallagher 2017.)
The second illustration concerns a passage in which James defended his
account of truth by urging that it was the concept used in successful
science. He identified the ‘traditional view’ that, for
early scientists, the ‘clearness, beauty and
simplification’ provided by their theories led them to think
that they had deciphered authentically the eternal thoughts of the
Almighty. By contrast, contemporary scientists held that ‘no
theory is absolutely a transcript of reality, but that any of them may
from some point of view be useful …’. A scientific theory
was to be understood as ‘an instrument: it is designed to
achieve a purpose – to facilitate action or increase
understanding’ (James 1907: 33). For James and Dewey, this holds
of all our concepts and theories: we treat them as instruments to be
judged by how well they achieve their intended purpose.
The third illustration comes from Peirce’s general theory of
signs, or
semiotics
, which was developed entirely independently
of the more well-known semiotics of Ferdinand de Saussure, and is one
of the most original areas of his thought. Peirce’s semiotics
offers an account of the contents of thoughts as well as language,
visual media, music and any other item that can be said to have
meaning (for introductions to this area of Peirce’s thought, see
Liszka 1996; Short 2007). Unlike Saussure, Peirce insisted that the
sign-relation was essentially
triadic
in structure,
comprising a representation, an object and an interpretation. In other
words: a sign is ‘about’ some object because it is
understood, in subsequent thought, as a sign of that object. This
subsequent thought Peirce calls the sign’s
interpretant
. In understanding or interpreting a sign, we may
feel things about it (which at times Peirce called the
emotional
interpretant
), undertake actions that are rational in the light of
the sign and the other information we possess (the
dynamic
interpretant
), or an indefinite number of inferences may be drawn
from it (the
logical interpretant
) (Jappy 2016). Interpretation
is generally a goal-directed activity and, once again, the content of
a sign is determined by the ways in which we use it (or might do
so).
A further triadic distinction deriving from Peirce’s theory of
signs which has been influential in disciplines from Biology to Media
Studies holds between three ways in which a sign may pick out its
object
by resembling it (or more generally, by possessing the very
properties that the sign aims to signify), e.g. a map
by indicating it in some brute unmediated fashion, e.g. a
weather-vane signifying the wind’s direction
via some arbitrary convention that must be learned, e.g. words in
English.
These three kinds of signs Peirce termed:
icon
index
and
symbol
respectively. Meanwhile, the three ways in which a
sign may give rise to its
interpretant
were categorised by
Peirce as:
the rheme (essentially: a term)
the proposition
the argument
Peirce continued to richly evolve and clarify his sign theory right to
the end of his life (Jappy 2016; Bellucci 2017),
albeit
means of some rather forbidding special-purpose technical terminology.
5. Pragmatism’s Contribution in Other Areas of Philosophy
5.1 Philosophy of Religion
We have noted that a strong motivation for James’ interest in
pragmatism was exploring truth in religion. He drew on his dual
training in philosophy and psychology for his famous book
The
Varieties of Religious Experience
: a unique compendium of
testimonies concerning matters such as prayer, worship and mystical
experience. These rich personal observations present an extended
example of the ‘radical empiricism’ introduced in 4.3.
James thereby trenchantly critiqued the intellectual methods of
contemporary theology (‘the metaphysical monster which they
offer to our worship is an absolutely worthless invention of the
scholarly mind’ (James 1902: 447)). James also advanced a
celebrated argument for religious faith in his paper “The Will
to Believe”: that for questions that are living, forced and
momentous (though only for those), ‘faith based on desire is
certainly a lawful, and possibly an indispensable thing’. He
thereby confronted his contemporary William Clifford’s
evidentialist claim that, ‘It is wrong always, everywhere, and
for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence’
(1877), generating a lively discussion which continues today (e.g.
Bishop 2007; Aikin 2014).
Despite James’ efforts to tightly circumscribe his
argument’s application, Peirce objected to such concessions in
epistemology, calling the paper in a letter to James, ‘a very
exaggerated utterance, such as injures a serious man very much’
(Misak 2013: 64). Peirce himself evolved from an early positivistic
disdain for religious questions to producing his own theistic
arguments in later life. In 1893, he published an essay entitled
“Evolutionary Love”, which passionately contested the
social Darwinism promulgated by many prominent thinkers in his era,
most notably Herbert Spencer (Pearce 2020), which he called ‘The
Gospel of Greed’. Here Peirce urges that amongst the three ways
the Universe may unfold: (i) by chance, (ii) deterministically, (iii)
through creative love, the third path is the highest and most likely
to endure since ‘…growth comes only from love, from I
will not say self-sacrifice, but from the ardent impulse to fulfill
another’s highest impulse’ (CP 6.289). In his final years
Peirce produced the remarkable essay “A Neglected Argument for
the Reality of God”, where he argued for God’s
reality
, not
existence
, to signal an ontological
priority of intelligible principles over efficient causes. The piece
is structured into three argumentative layers: (i) The Humble Argument
(an invitation to a phenomenological experiment) which is enfolded by,
(ii) The Neglected Argument (an original version of the Ontological
Argument) which is enfolded by, (iii) The Scientific Argument (a
prophecy of the fullness of future scientific inquiry). Work is
ongoing to draw out this unique piece’s full meaning.
Dewey turned his hand to religious questions in his 1934 book
Common Faith
. Here he argued that – contrary to what many
believe – removing faith in supernatural entities will not
destroy religion, but rather set it free from the many ‘creeds
and cults’ reflecting outdated social structures that currently
survive fossilised inside religious institutions. Rather than being
embodied by any kind of
entity
, he argued, the sacred is a
phase or quality of
experience
, namely, ‘some complex of
conditions that have operated to affect an orientation in
life…that brings with it a sense of security and peace’
(LW9: 13). Such conditions might equally be found in a forest or art
gallery as a church or temple. Despite its sophisticated argumentation
and originality, as an explication of religious life Dewey’s
approach has been considered abstract and somewhat anodyne.
5.2 Ethical and Political Philosophy
We’ve seen that philosophical pragmatism seeks to connect theory
to practice. In ethics, it can seem natural to interpret this as
recommending that normative notions be reduced to practical utility.
Thus James embraced utilitarian ethics as one of the branches of
pragmatism (James 1907). Peirce, however, took a different view.
Initially (around 1898) his naturalism led him to advocate a
sentimentalism
according to which ethical questions should be
settled by instinct, as our conscious reasoning is too recently
evolved and fallible to determine ‘vitally important
matters’. But around 1902 he began to warm towards ethical
theorising, as he developed a philosophical architectonic which placed
ethics directly prior to logic, since ethics studies what is good in
action, and logic studies what is good in thought, which is a species
of action. He noted, though, that such a ‘normative
science’ should be understood to study what goodness
not whether particular actions are good (by contrast to much normative
ethics today) since, ‘a science cannot have for its fundamental
problem to distribute objects among categories of its own
creation’ (CP 2.198). Recently scholars have turned with renewed
interest to developing Peirce’s ethics (e.g. Massecar 2016;
Atkins 2016).
A rich and systematic early contribution to pragmatist value theory
was made by Alain Locke, who wrote, ‘the gravest problem of
contemporary philosophy is how to ground some normative principle or
criterion of objective validity for values without resort to dogmatism
and absolutism on the intellectual plane, and without falling into
their corollaries, on the plane of social behavior and action, of
intolerance and mass coercion’ (Locke 1935: 336). Locke taught
that the distinctive feeling-qualities that values give rise to in us
are our ultimate guide in studying them, although function has an
important secondary role to play. He held the resulting axiology to be
pluralist, as well as culturally relativist.
Dewey also sought to steer ethics between the traditional poles of an
objectivism derived from some kind of human-transcendent authority,
and a subjectivism derived from individual preference. He believed
that both views err in granting the moral agent an identity prior to
interactions with others. For Dewey, we are more frail beings than
this, embedded in a sociality that runs much deeper, and the purpose
of moral theory is to provide constructive methods for addressing
human problems of a particular kind: those in which we find ourselves
unable to choose between equally valuable ends, with a dearth of
salient habits with which to cross the breach. With regard to such
questions, much effort is required to clear away traditional ethical
theory’s pretensions to deliver a spurious settled certainty.
Progress can be made by recognising the inherent uncertainty of moral
problems and the complexities of moral experience (Hildebrand 2008:
73), and being willing to inquire anew in every moral context, drawing
from a variety of scientific disciplines, in order to lay down new
intelligent habits. The evolution of Dewey’s ethical thinking
across his long career is richly explored in (Welchman 1995). A
notable recent attempt to develop a pragmatist metaethics drawing on
classical pragmatism is (Heney 2016).
We noted above that Dewey’s ‘second generation’
pragmatists turned wholeheartedly to questions concerning social
progress, contributing significantly to the activism and reforms of
the so-called Progressive Era (1896-1917). As such, political
philosophy has been an abiding interest within pragmatism. Dewey
famously thematised
democracy
philosophically – as more
than simply a system of government, rather, an ideal of egalitarianism
and open communication which calls forth the potential contributions
of every person to the greater good, and should equally be reached for
in civil society, workplaces and schools (more on the last below). Far
from a jingoistic apologist, Dewey was strongly critical of US
democracy, arguing in support of a socialised economy, particularly
during the Great Depression. He claimed that US adherence to classical
liberal individualism grievously misunderstands how we become persons
only in relation to one another, and the state can be said to
represent us only so far as we ‘are possessed of unity of
purpose and interest’ (EW1: 232. See also Westbrook 1991).
Although Dewey’s democratic ideal received strong
contemporaneous critique from ‘realists’ such as Walter
Lippman and F.A. Hayek, some of his ideas find expression today in
theories of
deliberative democracy
, which descend in part from
‘neopragmatist’ Habermas. A notable example is Christopher
Ansell’s proposal for a new ‘problem-solving
democracy’ (Ansell 2011. See also Westbrook 2005). Other
pragmatist political philosophers advocate for Peirce’s more
realist conception of inquiry over Dewey’s, as a superior ground
for democratic deliberation (Hoopes 1998; Misak 1999; Talisse 2008).
For a useful comparative summary of the political philosophies of
major pragmatist thinkers, see (Festenstein 1997). For recent work on
pragmatist approaches to justice, see (Dieleman et al 2017). As noted
earlier, pragmatist philosophers may be found advocating for many
contemporary liberatory projects (for a recent example, see McBride
2021).
5.3 Aesthetics
When (around 1902) Peirce defined ethics as a normative science
directly prior to logic, he also defined aesthetics as a normative
science directly prior to ethics (since aesthetics studies goodness in
and of itself, which may then be used to understand good action). This
focus on the intrinsically good or admirable broadens the purview of
aesthetics, which Peirce claims ‘has been handicapped by the
definition of it as the theory of beauty’ (CP 2.199, 1902).
Aesthetics is one of the least well worked-out areas of Peirce’s
philosophy; nevertheless he says some intriguing and suggestive things
about it. For instance he argues that the so-called
summum
bonum
(ultimate good) really consists in the growth of
‘concrete reasonableness’ (CP 1.602; 1.615; 2.34; 5.121;
5.433), as the only phenomenon ‘whose admirableness is not due
to an ulterior reason’ must be the furthering of Reason itself
(CP 1.615, 1903). Recent further development of this framework
includes (Kaag 2014; Gava 2014).
James did not make sustained contributions to aesthetics, but Dewey
did, particularly in his 1934 book
Art as Experience
. Dewey
viewed aesthetic appreciation as a peak human experience and
‘the greatest intellectual achievement in the history of
humanity’ (LW10:31, cited in Hildebrand 2008: 146). Consequently
the most important question in this area of philosophy is not how to
define necessary and sufficient conditions for Art, but how to enable
ordinary people to enjoy more of it, so that their lives might be more
meaningful. The way forward, Dewey suggested, is to learn to fetishize
professionally-curated contexts and Art objects less, in order to open
our eyes to consummatory experiences as they occur in the everyday
experience of the ‘live creature’. Examples of such
consummations include: ‘[a] piece of work is finished in a way
that is satisfactory; a problem receives its solution; a game is
played through…’ (LW10:42). In contrast to such
integrated completions within experience, both hedonistic dissipation
and rigid self-control count as ‘anesthetic’. True art
alternates between doing and undergoing. Notable recent work building
on Dewey’s aesthetics includes Richard Shusterman’s
somaesthetics
, which extends pragmatism’s defining
interest in agency to exploring the complex role of the human body in
aesthetic experience (Shusterman 1992; 2012).
5.4 Philosophy of Education
Peirce had some insightful things to say about pedagogy which
anticipate today’s ‘inquiry-based learning’ and
‘research-led teaching’, but they are scattered across his
writings (Strand 2005). The giant figure in philosophy of education is
of course Dewey, who pioneered it as a separate sphere of study when
he assumed the philosophy chair at University of Chicago in 1894. It
is important to note that this key move of Dewey’s took place in
a much broader context of reform-oriented, hands-on ‘experiments
in living’ by pragmatist-aligned thinkers and activists, many of
whom were female political and educational reformers (Gordon 1990). An
outstanding example is Jane Addams, who in 1889, with Ellen Gates
Starr, established Hull House in an impoverished immigrant
neighborhood of Chicago. Here, as part of a wider discovery of the
possibilities of social work, Addams innovated a pedagogy which used
students’ own experiences as starting points for learning
(Addams 1985; Fischer 2006; 2019; Knight 2005; 2010). Hull House
exercised a crucial influence on the Laboratory School that Dewey
later (1896) opened at University of Chicago with the help of his
wife, Alice Chipman Dewey. W.E.B. DuBois also made significant contributions to the settlement movement: he was hired that same year by the University of Pennsylvania in connection with the Philadelphia College Settlement in order to study ‘the social condition of the colored people of the Seventh
Ward of Philadelphia’ (Pearce 2020: 266). It is worth pondering the
consonance of these ventures with pragmatism’s teachings on
closing the gap between theory and lived experience, and asking what
may have led pragmatist philosophers back to the text-based, scholarly
approaches we largely see today.
Dewey’s career as philosopher of education coincided with a
period in which North America’s population was rapidly growing,
industrializing and urbanizing, shifting education delivery out of the
home into public institutions, and his ideas had enormous impact. Many
of his suggestions derive from his (aforementioned) vision of
democracy as not merely a system of voting, but the idea that every
societal institution might be designed to foster maximum flourishing
in every citizen. Viewed from this angle, traditional modes of
schooling whereby teachers deliver an approved (often
employer-sanctioned) set of ‘facts’ for children to
memorise count as despotic. Instead the emphasis should be on enabling
children to grow from within, according to their present interests and
capabilities, and become lifelong learners, although Dewey equally
criticises certain romantic, ‘child-centred’ educational
theorists of his day for neglecting to direct or guide the
child’s interests in any particular direction (Hildebrand 2008:
127). It’s also worth noting that Dewey sees education as
primarily a social not an individual process since, as noted above, he
views human identity-formation as irremediably social.
The result is a ‘problem-centred pedagogy’ which looks to
pragmatist epistemology understood as theory of inquiry for its
structure. The teacher begins by facilitating contact with some
phenomenon which proves genuinely puzzling to the students, then
guides them through a process which (if all goes well) resolves the
problematic situation to the satisfaction of all present. This
‘cycle of inquiry’ was formalised and developed further by
Dewey’s student Matthew Lipman as the basis of a worldwide
Philosophy for Children movement (Lipman et al 1977). It includes as
stages: articulating the problem and questions which might need to be
answered in its resolution, gathering data, suggesting hypotheses
which might potentially resolve the problem, and testing or otherwise
evaluating those hypotheses. Opening up the classroom to such
‘live’ thinking generates unpredictability which can be
challenging for the teacher to manage, but if the genuine
indeterminacy of the problematic situation can be successfully
navigated, the reward will be students who have learned not just how
know
, but how to
think
. In that regard, Dewey claimed
that his writings on education summed up his entire philosophical
position (Hildebrand 2008: 124). For Dewey, all philosophy was
philosophy of education.
Copyright © 2024
Catherine Legg
legg
deakin
edu
Christopher Hookway