Martin Heidegger
Editor’s Note: The following new entry by Mark Wrathall replaces the
former entry
on this topic by the previous author.
Martin Heidegger (1889–1976) is a central figure in the
development of twentieth-century European Philosophy. His
magnum
opus
Being and Time
(1927), and his many essays and
lectures, profoundly influenced subsequent movements in European
philosophy, including Hannah Arendt’s political philosophy,
Jean-Paul Sartre’s existentialism, Simone de Beauvoir’s
feminism, Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenology of perception,
Hans-Georg Gadamer’s hermeneutics, Jacques Derrida’s
deconstruction, Michel Foucault’s post-structuralism, Gilles
Deleuze’s metaphysics, the Frankfurt School, and critical
theorists like Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse, Jürgen Habermas,
and Georg Lukács. Beyond Europe,
Being and Time
has
influenced movements like the Kyoto School in Japan, and North
American philosophers like Hubert Dreyfus, Richard Rorty, and Charles
Taylor. His influence has extended far beyond the bounds of academic
philosophy, and his existential analysis of human existence has
inspired theorists in fields as diverse as theology, anthropology,
sociology, psychology, aesthetics, literary criticism, political
science, strategic management, and cognitive science.
The driving question in Heidegger’s work is “the question
of being”—the question of the meaning or sense of
being—and he argued that our understanding of being is
temporally structured. In
Being and Time
, Heidegger pursued
the question of being by means of a phenomenological exploration of
the way that time structures our engagement with the world. Heidegger
was an ontological pluralist: he held that there are multiple distinct
kinds
of being. Human beings or “Dasein”,
Heidegger argued, must be understood as beings-in-the-world, and thus
as constituted by our relationships to the practical and social
contexts that give meaning to our actions. The analytic of Dasein
underpinned his critique of post-Cartesian accounts of human beings as
subjects in an objective world. In his later work, Heidegger argued
that being is historical in a profound sense—that there has been
a sequence of distinct “epochs” of being, culminating in
the contemporary technological age. Heidegger argued that language and
works of art play a constitutive role in structuring these
“being-historical worlds”.
1. Life and Work
Being and Time
2.1 Kinds of Being
2.1.1 Availableness (Readiness-to-Hand)
2.1.2 Occurrentness (Presence-at-hand)
2.1.3 Dasein
2.2 Being-in-the-World
2.2.1 The World and Spatiality
2.2.2 Being-with and the Anyone
2.2.3 Being-in
2.2.3.1 Disposedness and Moods
2.2.3.2 Understanding and Interpretation
2.2.3.3 Discourse and Language
2.3 Everydayness
2.4 Authenticity
2.4.1 Death
2.4.2 Guilt and Resoluteness
2.5 Temporality
2.6 Reality
2.7 Truth
2.8 The Unfinished Project of
Being and Time
3. Nazi-Era Writings
4. The “Turning” and Heidegger’s Later Thought
5. The History of Being
5.1 Metaphysics
5.2 Technology
5.2.1 The Technological Mode of Revealing
5.2.2 The Danger of Technology
5.3 Beyond Metaphysics
A. Primary Literature
A.1
Gesamtausgabe
(Heidegger’s Collected Works)
A.2 Other Works by Heidegger
B. Secondary Literature
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
Supplement: Heidegger on Language
Supplement: Heidegger and the Other Beginning (Dwelling and the Fourfold)
1. Life and Work
Martin Heidegger was born on 26 September 1889 in Messkirch
Germany—a small, rural town in southwest Germany. His father,
Friedrich Heidegger, was a skilled craftsman (a master cooper) and a
sexton in the Catholic Church. Heidegger’s thought was
profoundly influenced by the provincial environs of his youth, his
conservative upbringing, and his intimate familiarity with craftwork
and the rhythms of agricultural life. In 1909, he entered the
University of Freiburg where he studied Catholic theology, the natural
sciences, and mathematics, before settling on philosophy as his course
of study. In 1913, he defended a dissertation on “The Doctrine
of Judgment in Psychologism: A Critical and Positive Contribution to
Logic”, and was awarded a doctorate in philosophy,
summa cum
laude
(GA1: 59–188). He continued with advanced studies at
the University of Freiburg, and was granted his license to teach upon
completion in 1915 of a habilitation dissertation on “The
Doctrine of Categories and Meaning in Duns Scotus”, written
under the direction of the Neo-Kantian philosopher Heinrich Rickert
(GA1: 189–411).
Between 1915 and 1923, Heidegger taught as a docent at the University
of Freiburg. He became Edmund Husserl’s assistant in 1919, with
whom he held “phenomenological exercises of seminars in
common” (BH 108). Heidegger’s personal and intellectual
relationship with Husserl was complicated and occasionally strained
(see Crowell 2005). Despite harshly criticizing Husserl in private,
Heidegger dedicated
Being and Time
to Husserl “in
friendship and admiration” (SZ vi).
In 1923, Heidegger accepted an associate professorship at the
University of Marburg, where he taught until 1928. During his Marburg
years, Heidegger lectured on ontology, truth, logic, and offered
phenomenological interpretations of key figures in the history of
philosophy.
His lectures attracted students from around Germany, including
Hans-Georg Gadamer, Karl Löwith, Hans Jonas, and Hannah Arendt.
While Arendt was Heidegger’s student, they began a
complicated love affair—stretching across half a century, from
1925 to 1975 (and ending only when Arendt died, 6 months before
Heidegger)—[that] raises numerous questions, not only
philosophical but also biographical, psychological, political, and
moral. (Thomson 2017: 454)
In 1927, Heidegger published his most important work—
Being
and Time, and
was promoted to full professor at Marburg. In 1928,
Heidegger was appointed to the chair previously held by Rickert and
Husserl at the University of Freiburg. In Davos in 1929, Heidegger
offered a series of lectures on Kant. The lectures were followed by a
disputation with Ernst Cassirer. Friedman (2000) argues that this
disputation was the hypocenter of the subsequent
analytical/continental divide in twentieth century philosophy.
Shortly after Adolf Hitler became German Chancellor and seized plenary
powers, Heidegger was elected Rector of Freiburg University in April
1933. He joined the Nazi Party on May 1
. As Rector,
Heidegger was responsible for the “alignment” or
“synchronization” (
Gleichschaltung
) of the
university with the aims of the Nazi Party. In April 1934, a scant
year later, Heidegger resigned the rectorship, although he remained a
member of the Nazi party until the end of the Nazi regime. The
significance for Heidegger’s philosophy of his reprehensible
engagement with National Socialism, as well as his now well-documented
anti-Semitism, is hotly disputed (see
section 3
In the decade following his resignation as Rector of Freiburg
University, and throughout the Second World War, Heidegger lectured
extensively on Friedrich Nietzsche and the poet Friedrich
Hölderlin. The philosophy of art became a central concern during
this period. He also offered lectures on Schelling, Hegel, and the
pre-Socratics.
Following Germany’s surrender in 1945, and hearings before a
Denazification Committee, Heidegger was barred by the French Military
Government from all teaching and university activities. The teaching
ban was lifted in 1949, allowing Heidegger to take emeritus status
from the University of Freiburg. Most of Heidegger’s
intellectual work for the last decades of his life took the form of
public lectures and published essays.
Heidegger’s later thought was increasingly preoccupied with the
history of being, with the nature of language, and with the dangers of
our technological age. In response to the technologization of everyday
life, Heidegger worked to develop a non-calculative mode of thinking,
and to encourage post-technological forms of “poetic
dwelling”.
Heidegger died on 26 May 1976 in Freiburg, and was buried in
Messkirch, Germany on 28 May 1976.
Being and Time
Heidegger’s declared aim in
Being and Time
“is
the concrete working out of the question of the ‘meaning’
Sinn
) of ‘being’” (SZ 1). As Carman
explains, Heidegger self-consciously orients his project in a way
that
departs dramatically from traditional ontology in that it asks not
what there is,
nor
why there is what there is,
nor
even
why there is anything at all and not nothing
Heidegger’s question [is] … What does it
mean
for something to be? (Carman 2003: 8)
In asking about the sense or meaning of being, Heidegger’s
inquiry is not primarily focused on linguistic meaning. Something has
meaning in the sense that Heidegger intends when it
makes
sense
—when we can take it up into our activities, respond
to it sensibly, deal with it intelligibly, and so on. So “the
question of being” could be reformulated as: What do we
understand when being makes sense to us?
Because Heidegger focuses his inquiry on the sense or meaning of
being, many interpreters of Heidegger attribute to him the so-called
“intelligibility interpretation of being”—that is,
the view that “what Heidegger means by ‘being’ just
is intelligibility” (McDaniel 2016: 307). Dreyfus, for instance,
explains that “being is not a substance, a process, an event, or
anything that we normally come across; rather it is a fundamental
aspect of entities, viz. their intelligibility” (Dreyfus 1991:
xi).
Sheehan likewise argues that “we should always understand the
misleading ontological terms ‘the being’ or
‘beingness’ of things as the intelligibility of
things” (Sheehan 2015b:
22).
Blattner criticizes the intelligibility interpretation on the grounds
that it commits Heidegger to a dogmatic form of idealism—an
idealism that would “follow from his
stipulative
definition
of ‘being’”, whereas Blattner
insists that Heidegger offers a “novel and important”
argument
for his idealism (Blattner 1999: 3). Rather than
simply identifying
being
with
intelligibility
Blattner argues that being “makes up the criterial standards to
which entities must conform in order to be entities at all”
(Blattner 1999: 5). Thus, being isn’t reducible to
intelligibility, although our understanding of being is a necessary
condition of entities being intelligible to us. Others argue that the
intelligibility interpretation fails to do justice to instances where
Heidegger uses the word “being” in a way that is
not
tied to human understanding (Olafson 1987: 140). McDaniel
points out that identifying
being
with
intelligibility
would commit Heidegger
to the claim that an entity has being if and only if it is
intelligible to us
, and it is hard to square this
bi-condition with [Heidegger’s] claim that some entities are
modally independent of us. (McDaniel 2016: 308)
Thus McDaniel, like Olafson, argues that Heidegger uses the word
‘being’ in equivocal ways (see McDaniel 2016: 317).
Heidegger’s (apparent) answer to the being-question is that
time
(or
temporality
) is what allows us to make
sense of being—that time is “the possible horizon for any
understanding whatsoever of being” (SZ 1). Thus, Heidegger
intended to argue in
Being and Time
that only if and when
“temporality temporalizes itself” “can entities
manifest themselves as entities” (GA26: 274/211–2).
Consequently, “[t]he fundamental subject of research in ontology
… is temporality” (GA24: 22 / 16–7).
Being and
Time
is, however, a notoriously incomplete work. Only about
one-third of the book as originally conceived was ever published. The
two published divisions of the book are largely devoted to an analytic
of human existence in terms of time. Had the anticipated third
division been published, it would have argued that “temporality
is the condition of the possibility of all understanding of
being,” and not just of human existence (GA24: 389). Heidegger
also planned a Part 2 of
Being and Time
, in which he intended
to demonstrate that the ontologies of Aristotle, Descartes, and Kant
all rest on a conception of time. Together, Part 1 and Part 2 were
meant to demonstrate that temporality “makes ontology
possible” (GA24:
323).
Despite its incompleteness, Heidegger stakes out a number of important
claims about ontology in
Being and Time.
He argues for
“ontological pluralism”—that is, for the idea that
there are a number of distinct
kinds
of being, or that
“things exist in fundamentally different ways” (McDaniel
2009: 290; McDaniel 2010: 688; see also McManus 2013; Turner 2010).
Different kinds of being will have different ontological structures,
and correspondingly different conditions under which entities of a
particular kind can be said to be (see GA24: 169–170).
Heidegger also draws a distinction between being and
entities,
and thus between ontological inquiries and ontic
sciences.
entity
is anything that satisfies the conditions set out
in an ontological “framework”. Heidegger thus uses the
word ‘entity’ in a very broad sense. Material
things—Austin’s “moderate-sized specimens of dry
goods”—are entities; but so are actions and events (like
the storming of the US Capitol on 6 January 2021), as are abstract
objects (like numbers and sets, concepts and propositions).
Being
, by contrast, is “the basic character of
entities”,—“that which determines entities as
entities” (GA20: 195; SZ 1).
Heidegger also argues for what he calls “the truth-character of
being”—that is, the idea that there “is” only
being as long as there is disclosure, and that being
needs
in order to be disclosed (see GA24: 25; GA73.1: 204). It is for this
reason that Heidegger approaches ontology by way of an analysis of
human beings in their role as being-disclosers. Because we are the
beings that understand being, by starting with an inquiry into human
existence we can
acquire an understanding of what it is to understand Being; and since
what is understood in an understanding of Being is indeed Being, to
grasp the constitutive structure of that understanding … will
be to grasp the constitutive structure of that which is thereby
understood. (Mulhall 2013: 18)
2.1 Kinds of Being
Being and Time
, Heidegger discusses primarily three kinds
of being:
availableness (translated ‘readiness-to-hand’ in MR,
and ‘handiness’ in SR);
occurrentness (translated as ‘presence-at-hand’ in MR,
and ‘objective presence’ in SR); and
existence, which is the kind of being that characterizes human
existence or ‘Dasein’.
But these three are never offered as an exhaustive list of the kinds
of being, and Heidegger suggests that other kinds of being include:
life, numbers, and perhaps
nature.
Arguably, works of art also have a distinct kind of being (see
GA29/30: 514; GA5: 5–6).
2.1.1 Availableness (Readiness-to-Hand)
An entity is
available
(or “ready-to-hand”) if it
is “usable” or “serviceable” for some activity
or task. Heidegger’s paradigmatic examples of entities that have
availableness
as their kind of being are tools and
instruments—broadly speaking, equipment. But it is not just
tools like hammers that are available; most inanimate objects that we
encounter in our everyday lives are disclosed in the first instance as
available. For instance, because the sun is usable by us to tell the
time, to light our activities, and to warm our houses, the sun is
“something which is available with uniform constancy” (SZ
103). Rivers and the wind are usable for power and navigation;
mountains are usable as a quarry of rock; the wood is usable as a
forest of timber (SZ 70).
Heidegger’s name for the ontological structure of the
available
is the German term
Bewandtnis
. MR translates this as
‘involvement’ and SR as ‘relevance’. But
Heidegger has in mind a very specific kind of involvement that
determines an entity as available. Hofstadter takes the definitive
involvement of equipment to be its “way of being functionally
deployed”, and he consequently translates
Bewandtnis
‘functionality’ (GA24: 233/164 & 96/68). Wrathall
argues that what is basic to available entities is that each affords
the doing of particular actions in particular contexts. Consequently,
he argues that
Bewandtnis
should be translated
‘affordance’. In affording action, available entities
“refer” to or stand in relations of
“reference” (
Verweisung
) to a whole network or
“context” of other available
entities
—i.e.,
in affording some activity, equipment literally directs or sends its
user on to other entities. For instance, when a fountain pen is
available, this is because it affords writing. And in affording
writing, the fountain pen “sends me” to the paper; the
paper sends me to the desk and the chair; together, the chair, desk,
pen, and paper guide me into the proper bodily stance for writing on
the
paper.
Given the affordance-and-reference structure of the available, an
available entity only “genuinely can show itself in its
being” when we are engaged in using
it.
Discovering the available requires not just an active response to it,
but also a specific kind of seeing—one that is constantly taking
in affordances in terms of their references. This kind of seeing is
not a focally directed
looking-at
an object, but a constant
perceptual monitoring of the entire context of action. Heidegger calls
this
circumspection
: literally, looking around to take in
“the manifold references of the
‘in-order-to’”.
Thus, Heidegger claims, in our everyday encounter with available
entities, we do not encounter objects with occurrent properties.
Rather, what we encounter in the first instance are holistic contexts
that are articulated into invitations to act, invitations which move
us (i.e., “refer” us) to further affordances. The entities
that make up the world are “not thing-like objects but
significations” (GA64: 65), and “it is not things but
references which have the primary function in the structure of
encounter belonging to the world; not substances but functions”
(GA20: 272). As Dreyfus explains,
when absorbed in coping, I can be described
objectively
using the door
a door, but I’m not
experiencing
the door
a door. In coping at my
best, I’m not experiencing
the door
at all but simply
pressing into the possibility of going out. The important thing to
realize is that, when we are pressing into possibilities, there is no
experience of an
entity
doing the soliciting; just the
solicitation. (Dreyfus 2014:
256)
2.1.2 Occurrentness (Presence-at-hand)
There is considerable ambiguity surrounding Heidegger’s use of
the adjective “occurrent” (
vorhanden
) and the
noun “the occurrent” (
das Vorhandene
). McManus
identifies at least 36 (slightly) different shades of meaning (McManus
2012: 53 ff.), although many of these are undoubtedly best understood
as aspects of a core meaning.
Cerbone points out that there is a broad distinction between a
“generic” and a “restricted” use of the term
“occurrent” (Cerbone 2021: 538). In the generic sense,
Heidegger uses the term “occurrent” to indicate that
something is actually or presently “in existence”. Any
kind of entity can be occurrent in this general
sense.
In its special or restricted sense, something is occurrent when it has
occurrentness (
Vorhandenheit
) as its kind of being.
Heidegger’s paradigmatic examples of entities that have
occurrentness as their kind of being are material
things,
the natural things studied by the natural sciences
Naturdinge
, GA80.1: 186–7), the kind of entities that
are defined most precisely in terms of their spatial and causal
properties.
Blattner emphasizes that the occurrent is independent of
Dasein’s worldly activities: “to be as occurrent is to be
present independently of Dasein and its social world” (Blattner
1999: 7). Although philosophers tend to take occurrentness as
ontologically basic, Heidegger insists that what we encounter in the
first instance and most of the time are available entities. Normally
we are swept along in purposively engaging with available entities,
which show up precisely in terms of their practical significance of
us. Thus, for entities to show up as independent of our activities and
interests, “there must first be a
deficiency
in the
concernful dealings with the world” (SZ
61).
Instead of circumspectively taking in the network of affordances of a
situation, the one who holds back perceives in the mode of
“explicitly looking-at (
Hinsehen
) what is
encountered” (SZ 61).
We also encounter the occurrent in cases of a breakdown in our ability
to fluidly cope with the world—when, for instance, “a tool
turns out to be damaged” (SZ 73). In such cases, our attention
is drawn to the material foundations of available equipment, and
“pure occurrentness announces itself” (SZ 73).
Heidegger claims that we have a mistaken but “natural tendency
to regard all entities in the first instance as occurrent”
(GA24: 92). This perhaps is because reflection and theorizing about
the world typically involves the very type of holding-back and
looking-at objects that reveals the occurrent. The tendency is
exacerbated—or so Dreyfus argues—because the propositional
language we use to talk about the world lends itself easily to
representing objects as substances with decontextualizable
properties.
In any event, Heidegger claims that in “looking-at”
entities, “
the understanding of being
which guides
concernful dealings with intraworldly entities
has changed
over
” (SZ 361). Consequently, philosophical ontology almost
inevitably takes the occurrent as having primacy.
It would be a mistake, Heidegger insists, to understand availableness
as a subjective projection of use-properties onto entities that are in
themselves “really” occurrent (see SZ 71). Available
entities are individuated differently than occurrent entities, and
they have different kinds of properties than occcurrent entities.
Thus, there is no necessary one-to-one correspondence between an
affordance and an occurrent
object.
2.1.3 Dasein
In ordinary German, the noun ‘
Dasein
’ means
existence
, but Heidegger appropriates the word to designate
human beings. In referring to us as ‘Dasein’ instead of
‘human’ [
Mensch
], Heidegger highlights the fact
that he is inquiring into our kind of being, and not engaged in an
anthropological, psychological, or biological study.
‘Dasein’ picks us out insofar as we have an understanding
of being (SZ 12).
Heidegger leaves open the possibility that there are other, non-human
beings which also share our kind of being. He claims in
Being and
Time
that “the sciences, as fields of human activity, have
the kind of being of this entity (the human)” (SZ 11). He also
claims that “language itself has Dasein’s kind of
being” (GA20: 373). John Haugeland has inferred from such claims
that Dasein is any coherent pattern that is “generated and
maintained by
conformism”.
But the textual support for Haugeland’s reading is equivocal at
best. Heidegger never says that science or language
Dasein—rather, he says that such things share Dasein’s
kind of being. Moreover, Heidegger in fact repeatedly uses
‘Dasein’ as a count
noun,
and he explains that “the word ‘Dasein’ does not
designate a way of being at all, but rather a particular entity, that
we are ourselves, the human Dasein. We are each respectively a
Dasein” (GA24:
36).
In his later thought, Heidegger reverts to using the term ‘human
being’ (
Mensch
) as the name for “the entity that
we are”. ‘Da-sein’, usually hyphenated in his later
works, is reserved as a name for “the place” within which
a historical community of people takes a stand on its form of life.
Da-sein, in other words, is “the locality dwelt in by
mortals” (GA9:
373/283).
Being and Time
, Heidegger reserves ‘existence’
Existenz
) as a term for designating Dasein’s kind of
being. To mark out the ontological distinction between existence and
other kinds of being, Heidegger uses the words
‘categories’ and ‘categorial’ to refer to the
ontological structures of everything but Dasein. The ontological
structures of Dasein are called ‘existentials’. And
Heidegger uses the adjective ‘existentiell’ to refer to
ontic instantiations of existential structures. For instance, being in
a happy mood is an existentiell determination of an ontological
feature of human existence—namely, the ‘existential’
of disposedness (see
section 2.2.3.1
Existence is a kind of being that is essentially related to
possibilities.
Because it is essentially modal in this way, Dasein can never be
defined in terms of occurrent facts about
it.
So for a Dasein, there is an indeterminacy surrounding what—or,
rather,
who
—any given Dasein is, and that means that
Dasein’s being is “at stake” in at least three ways.
An existing being: (a) has multiple ways of being who it is (it can
take on a variety of social roles—mother, poet, conservative,
etc.); (b) has multiple modes of being—in particular, an
existing entity can be in the mode of owning responsibility for itself
(i.e., authenticity), or not owning responsibility for itself (i.e.,
inauthenticity); and (c) an existing being can decide to not be at
all. To be a Dasein thus means: I always understand myself (at some
level) in terms of the contingency of my current existence.
2.2 Being-in-the-World
Most of
Being and Time
is taken up with Heidegger’s
analytic of Dasein’s ontological structure. This is because, as
Carman explains,
the question of being, as Heidegger conceives it, is inseparable from
questions concerning the understanding and the existence of those
entities for which, or rather for whom, the question of being can be a
question at all, namely, ourselves, human beings. (Carman 2003: 9)
Heidegger thus hopes to provide a foundation for ontology in
general—a “fundamental ontology”—through an
account of our understanding of
being.
The “fundamental structure”(
Fundamentalstruktur
or “basic constitution” (
Grundverfassung
) of
Dasein is “being-in-the-world”. Heidegger hyphenates
‘being-in-the-world’ to indicate that it is a
“unitary phenomenon”. A unitary phenomenon is made up
holistically of parts that cannot exist separately, and each of which
is what it is only through its relationship to the others. The parts
at issue here are the world
section 2.2.1
the ‘self’ who exists in the world
section 2.2.2
and the relational structure of
being in
section 2.2.3
2.2.1 The World and Spatiality
The world we inhabit is a particular organized whole of different
settings for human activity—factories and offices, homes and
parks, transportation networks and shops, etc. Thus, Heidegger defines
world
as “that ‘wherein’ a factical Dasein
as such ‘lives’” (SZ 65). To fully appreciate this
definition, we need to see that Heidegger quite deliberately develops
his account of Dasein’s being-in-the-world by contrasting it
with the Cartesian distinction between disembodied subjects and a
spatially-extended material world. “The spatiality of
Dasein”, Cerbone notes, is “fundamentally different in
kind” from the determinate, mathematical spatiality that for
Descartes is the mark of the “external” world (Cerbone
2013:
131).
This is not to reject altogether Descartes’ account of
spatiality, but to limit its applicability to occurrent entities. The
phenomenology of Dasein’s involvement in the world, however,
shows that the Cartesian account of space fails to capture the
distinctive spatial character of the world we inhabit.
The spatiality of the available
is not reducible to an
object’s position on a mathematically-determinable grid.
Instead, its spatiality is structured primarily by
differentials
of usability
. That is, “entities are near or far according
to whether they are involved or not involved in, or attended or not
attended to, in the activities that take place in that world”
(Schatzki 2021: 690). As Dreyfus puts it, “[a] thing is near to
me whan I am able to get a maximal grip on it” (Dreyfus 1991:
133).
Dasein’s spatiality or ‘existential
spatiality’
is something that Dasein produces rather than
merely finds itself in. Dasein’s concern for things and
solicitude for other people “determines its
‘location’” in existential space (SZ 132). In other
words, something is existentially near to me when it matters to me;
far from me when it is irrelevant to my concerns. It is through
differentials of mattering
that we come to organize the space
of the available. Thus, Dasein is not occurrent at a position in
Cartesian space. Instead, Dasein “is the arranging of space into
a room for maneuver, a site of active responding to
solicitations” (Wrathall 2017a: 230).
One weakness of Heidegger’s account, however, is that he never
explains what role our material bodies play in constituting the
existential space that we inhabit—other, that is, than pointing
out that the way we inhabit space is not reducible to the physical and
material features of a material body (a “corpus” or
Körper
). (For more on this problem, see Cerbone
2000)
2.2.2 Being-with and the Anyone
When Heidegger turns to the “who” question—who is
the self or the agent who inhabits this practical world?—he
initially focuses on the way that our everyday self-understanding is
grounded in being with
others.
Thus, there is an ineliminably social dimension to existence.
Being a Dasein involves others in a variety of ways. For one thing, we
stand in identity-defining relations to others. A Dasein is a parent,
a friend, an American, a teacher, and we experience the world in terms
of such identities, each of which amounts to situating us with respect
to others. In addition, what equipment affords or solicits me to do is
structured by the existence of others. As Heidegger puts it,
“the co-existence of others is often encountered in terms of
what is available within-the-world” (SZ 120). If a field shows
up as belonging to someone else, I am solicited to “walk along
the edge of the field but ‘outside it’” (SZ
118).
Because my response to the world is intrinsically shaped by relations
to others, Heidegger argues that “being-with” is an
ontological structure of being-in-the-world. As a
“being-with”, I am essentially keyed in to, and responsive
to, the way others comport themselves in our shared world. This means,
Heidegger points out, that each of us already has a basic
“understanding of the other”—not a cognition or
explicitly formulable kind of understanding, but one that is manifest
in our ability to cope fluidly with the situations in which we need to
act together.
In addition, the intelligibility of the world as we encounter it is,
in the first instance, structured by socially-shared aims, norms,
tastes, and standards. Heidegger refers to this social normativity as
“the anyone” (
das Man
; translated in MR and SR as
“the they”) because in grasping this intelligibility, we
act as anyone
would.
Because the everyday world shows up as soliciting me to respond in the
way that anyone would, Heidegger argues that the real self of everyday
existence is “the
anyone-self”.
As Knudsen explains,
when Dasein understands itself through solicitations inflected by
social norms, it comes to see itself not as a unique individual but
simply as one participant among many in the normative structure of a
given group. (Knudsen 2023: 160)
This way of being a self disburdens us of the responsibility of
choice, because it dictates what shows up as an appropriate response
to any
situation.
In Division Two of
Being and Time
, Heidegger will contrast
the anyone-self with the authentic or ownmost self (see
section 2.4
If the anyone self does what anyone would do, the authentic or
“ownmost” self “
take[s] action in itself
terms of the ability-to-be that it has chosen. Only in this way can it
responsible” (SZ 288).
2.2.3 Being-in
Heidegger argues that the “self” of everyday existence is
the anyone self, meaning that we experience the world as soliciting us
to do the sort of things that anyone would do. The “world”
of everyday existence is a particular whole of equipmental contexts
that sustain us in doing what one does in the world. But what does it
mean for such a self to be
such a world? Dasein’s
being-in
, Heidegger argues, amounts to
familiarity
—the
kind of familiarity invoked when I say “I am at home in
such-and-such a place”. Being at home in a place means being
accustomed to the style and pace of life in that place. It means
flourishing when participating in the activities that characterize
such a place. And it means possessing the habits and skills to respond
to the affordances of that world.
Heidegger identifies three structural elements that co-constitute
being-in: an affective
disposedness
, an
understanding
, and
discourse
(i.e., an ability to
articulate the world into intelligible features). Disposedness,
understanding, and discourse are
equiprimordial
moments of
our familiarity with the world (SZ 133). “Equiprimordial”
structures are equally fundamental, and cannot exist without each
other. So “understanding always has its mood [i.e., its
disposedness]” (SZ 143) and “to any disposedness or mood,
understanding belongs” (SZ 270). But for analytical purposes, it
is helpful to discuss each component of being-in in turn.
2.2.3.1 Disposedness and Moods
A key structural feature of Dasein is our affectivity—our being
disposed to respond in an immediate,
felt
way to the situations we encounter. Heidegger names our structural
affectivity ‘disposedness’ (
Befindlichkeit
translated in M&R as ‘state-of-mind’ and in SR as
‘attunement’). The paradigmatic existentiell form of
disposedness is
mood
, but other affective states like
feelings
and
emotions
are also ontic manifestations
of disposedness (SZ 138). The essential function of affective states
like moods is to disclose how the entities we encounter
“matter” to us (SZ 137). In a mood of fear, for example,
entities in the world stand out and matter insofar as they pose a
threat, are under threat, or offer a means of protection against a
threat. (See Slaby 2008: 130ff for a detailed analysis of fear, and of
Heidegger’s theory of moods more broadly.) As Golob
explains,
in moods the world is manifest as mattering in various ways….
Prior to any kind of rational calculation as to what I should do,
there must be an initial assignment of values to the various options:
[disposedness] refers to the fact that we “always already”
find ourselves operating against the backdrop of some such assignment.
(Golob 2017: 25)
Heidegger argues that it is a mistake to think of disposedness as
either “subjective” or objective”. “A
mood”, he explains, “comes neither from
‘outside’ nor from ‘inside’ but arises out of
being-in-the-world, as a way of such being” (SZ
136).
One way to see that disposedness is not a merely subjective feeling
or “coloring” is to notice that our ability to engage with
the “objective” world is enhanced by being in the
appropriate mood. The most objective scientific research, for
instance, depends on our ability to “look theoretically at what
is just occurrent”, and that in turn requires a mood of
“tranquil tarrying alongside” (SZ 138). In showing that
“moods cannot be properly described as fleeting private feelings
projected upon the world”, Dreyfus points to the fact that moods
can be shared with others, and many moods are essentially social and
public. Moreover, the moods we are prone to are shaped by the
“longstanding sensibilities” of the culture in which we
are raised (Dreyfus 1991:
172).
Heidegger accords to the mood of
anxiety
a special
methodological role in disclosing the contribution that disposedness
makes to our familiarity with a world (see Ratcliffe 2008: 52 and
Withy 2012: 195). Because anxiety is a breakdown in our everyday
ability to engage meaningfully with the world, it lets us notice what
otherwise is too pervasive to attract our attention: namely, that our
ability to function in the world is sustained by an immediate, felt
sense for how things matter. When overcome by anxiety, that mattering
“collapses” and the affordances of the world show up as
being “of no consequence” (SZ 186). In this breakdown, our
preoccupation with everyday tasks falls away, leaving us with a clear
view of the essential structure of our existence. We learn, in
particular, that even when all else fails we still
care
about
our being, and all the other things we concern ourselves with are
rooted ultimately in this fundamental care. As McMullin puts it, we
learn that “[t]o be a self is to be defined by care-laden
openness to the world” (McMullin 2013:
17).
It is a matter of some dispute precisely what phenomenon Heidegger has
in mind when discussing anxiety. Stolorow has argued that
Heidegger’s existential interpretation of anxiety “bear[s]
a close similarity” to the affective state produced by emotional
trauma (Stolorow 2011: 3). Blattner argues that “the core
phenomenon of what Heidegger calls ‘anxiety’ are
characteristic of what we today call
depression
(Blattner 2006: 141–2). Ratcliffe, meanwhile, has observed that
“Heideggerian ‘anxiety’ encompasses a range of
subtly different experiences” (Ratcliffe 2008: 12). Perhaps we
should see existential anxiety as disconnected from any particular
phenomenal qualities. Instead, in anxiety everything I encounter in
the world is experienced as lacking ultimate and intrinsic
mattering.
2.2.3.2 Understanding and Interpretation
Heidegger defines
understanding
as “projection onto
possibilities”.
The thought here is a straightforward one: to make sense of anything
is to see it in its modal context. For instance, a minimal
understanding of the game of chess involves knowing the possibilities
for movement open to each piece (a bishop can move forward and back
along a diagonal, while a pawn cannot move backwards and must advance
along a file unless it is capturing another piece). A richer
understanding of chess recognizes yet other possibilities—how
capturing a piece with a pawn might weaken a pawn structure, or how an
opponent’s move is setting up a king-side attack, or how an
opponent is likely to respond if I castle queen’s side.
To be at home
a world is to understand it, and that means
to possess the practical and cognitive skills for recognizing and
responding to the situations and possibilities that one typically
encounters in that world. When at home in a world, one typically
responds immediately and confidently to the situations one encounters.
This has encouraged a number of interpreters to equate understanding
in general with “skillful
coping”.
This “pragmatist” interpretation of Heideggerian
understanding captures the anti-cognitivism of Heidegger’s
account of understanding. “‘[U]nderstanding’ in the
sense of one possible kind of cognizing among others”, Heidegger
insists, “must … be interpreted as an existential
derivative of that primary understanding which is one of the
constituents of the being of the ‘there’ in general”
(SZ 143). Other scholars, however, object that the “primary
understanding” Heidegger refers to is not skillful activity, but
projective seeing in terms of possibilities. The type of seeing
employed in skillful know-how is perhaps the best exemplar of
understanding as such, but it is not definitive of it (see Wrathall
2013b).
Heidegger defines
interpretation
as the “working
out” of “possibilities projected in the
understanding” (SZ 148). This working out involves enacting one
of the possible ways of construing the situation in question:
interpretation is “[t]he mode of enactment of the understanding
… specifically as the cultivation, appropriation, and
preservation of what is discovered in understanding” (GA20:
366). Interpretation, as MacAvoy puts it, “articulate[s] by
focusing on one signification and carving it out of [a] whole”
(MacAvoy 2021: 116). Many interpreters understand this articulation as
“making explicit” what is grasped unthematically in the
understanding.
Other commentators argue that interpretation consists in responding
to some particular subset of the whole of affordances that we
understand. But this need not involve any explicit thought or
attention.
In either case, interpretation involves the enactment of one of the
multiple possibilities open to an agent. Through that enactment, the
agent’s understanding is developed, made concrete, and
refined.
2.2.3.3 Discourse and Language
Heidegger defines discourse (
Rede
) as “the articulation
into significations of the intelligibility of
being-in-the-world—an intelligibility that is
disposed”.
(SZ 162) In other words, discourse picks out the significant features
of our active engagement with the world—the features that we
understand, interpret, and to which we affectively respond when we are
at home in the world. Discourse provides us with the ability to
reliably recognize and skillfully respond to the recurring significant
features that we encounter in the course of our active engagement with
our surroundings. But primordial discourse can degrade into
idle
talk
Gerede
). We then no longer possess the skills to
pick out the rich, fine-grained features of situations that guide a
genuine understanding. Instead, we make use of an articulation that is
levelled down in such a way that anyone can understand it and talk
about it: “Idle talk is the possibility of understanding
everything without previously making the thing one’s own”
(SZ 169).
Being and Time
and works of that period, Heidegger argued
that discourse is a fundamental, pre-linguistic level of
significations which forms the foundation of language: “[t]here
is language”, he argued, “only because there is discourse,
not the other way around” (GA20: 366; see also SZ 161). Language
was thus taken to be a derivative phenomenon.
Scholars disagree however, on the degree to which discourse can be
distinguished from language (see, e.g., Golob 2014: 105 ff., Withy
2021a: 136; Carman 2025: 71ff.; see also
supplement: Heidegger on language
Some interpreters collapse entirely the distinction between discourse
and linguistic utterance, or argue that Heidegger’s attempt to
distinguish between language and discourse is “doomed to
failure” (Lafont 994 [2000: 67]).
Being and Time
, however, offers multiple examples of
discourse that is neither linguistically structured nor linguistically
expressible.
Even
communication
has for Heidegger a primarily pragmatic
meaning: communication in the most general sense means sharing
one’s orientation toward the “object” of discourse
with others—“[i]t is letting someone see with us what we
have pointed out” (SZ 155). And while in everyday communication,
this co-orientation takes place “for the most part by way of
uttering it in language” (SZ 272), communication does not
require linguistic expression. For instance, in the call of
conscience—Heidegger’s most important example of
discursive communication—“the call dispenses with any kind
of utterance. It does not put itself into words at all” (SZ
273). And “taken strictly”, the mode of discourse in the
call of conscience has no content: “the call asserts nothing,
gives no information about world-events, has nothing to tell”
(SZ 273).
2.3 Everydayness
The avowed purpose of Division One of
Being and Time
is an
analytic of Dasein “in its average everydayness” (SZ 16).
The world of everyday Dasein is a concrete whole of affordances
Bewandtnisganzheit
)—i.e., the ordinary equipmental
contexts that sustain a particular form of life. This includes
kitchens, bedrooms, houses, neighborhoods, towns, cities, shops,
streets, bridges, boats, buildings, workspaces, and so on, all
interlinked in a mutually sustaining whole (see, e.g., GA24:
233–4; GA64: 25). The norms that govern activities in the
everyday world are social standards established by the anyone. The
“self” of everyday existence is the
“anyone-self”—meaning that, for Dasein in its
ordinary life, the affordances that solicit a response are those that
draw us into a conformist way of comporting ourselves. Heidegger
describes this condition of inauthentic existence as
“fallenness”.
Heidegger’s account of falling draws on the Christian
theological tradition (and Kierkegaard in particular), and the word
“fallen” is meant to capture the idea that, in everyday
existence, Dasein “surrenders itself to the ‘world’
and lets the ‘world’ ‘matter’ to it in such a
way that somehow Dasein evades its very self” (SZ 139; see also
SZ 178). One surrenders to the world by becoming fully “absorbed
in” mundane daily activities (SZ 175). There is, moreover,
“a constant temptation towards falling” (SZ 177). At the
same time, Heidegger protests that falling is misunderstood if taken
as “a bad and deplorable ontical property” (SZ 176).
Instead, he insists, falling must be understood as an
“ontologico-existential structure” (SZ 176).
Treating falling as an ontologico-existential, however, leads to a
potential problem for Heidegger’s account. As Mulhall points
out, if fallenness is an ontological feature of Dasein, that would
seem to make authenticity
impossible.
Such concerns have led Dreyfus to argue that a distinction should be
drawn between “fleeing”—a motivated desire to
identify oneself with the social roles to which one is already
assigned, and “falling”, understood as a properly
ontological tendency in all Dasein to get absorbed in their activities
(see Dreyfus 1991: 182, 228). “Simply by being
socialized”, Dreyfus argues, “Dasein takes over the
fallenness of the [any]one” (Dreyfus 1991: 235). This structural
form of falling, moreover, is a positive constituent of Dasein’s
familiarity with the world. Through falling into the world, we acquire
a basic grasp of the intelligibility of everything we
encounter.
Carman argues that Dreyfus’s distinction between structural
falling and motivated fleeing is at best, however, a partial
explanation of Heidegger’s account of falling, since this would
explain only why we find ourselves initially in a fallen condition. It
would not explain why, as Heidegger insists, falling is “not
just a prior condition of intelligibility, but an ongoing dynamic
tendency, a perpetual pull away from authentic existence”
(Carman 2000: 17). Carman and Käufer both suggest that the pull
toward a banalized and inauthentic understanding comes from the need
to coordinate with others: “everyday dealings … are
tempting, insofar as we experience a constant pull to understand and
articulate our possibilities in terms of the public discourse that is
constituted in being with others” (Käufer 2021b:
314).
2.4 Authenticity
Heidegger launches Division Two by turning the focus from the
conformism of everyday existence to Dasein’s ability to be
“authentically a self in primordial individualization” (SZ
324).
How should we understand the distinction between inauthentic and
authentic modes of Dasein? “You exist in the mode of
authenticity
”, Käufer explains, “if you have
‘chosen, or achieved yourself in your being’, and you
exist in the mode of
inauthenticity
if you have ‘lost
or only seemingly achieved yourself’” (Käufer 2021a:
71). For Heidegger, to “choose” or “achieve”
oneself does not mean that we have a true, deep self that lies hidden
and must be recovered (see Carman 2005: 287). Instead, Heideggerian
authenticity, as the German word for
‘authentic’—
eigentlich
—suggests,
“means an existence that is owned, or taken hold of”
(Käufer 2015: 104). But there are, in the secondary literature,
many different interpretations of what is involved in owning
one’s
existence.
The
Aristotelian
approach, as advocated by Dreyfus,
interprets authenticity as a kind of
phronetic
expertise—a skillful mastery at bringing out what is best in
each concrete situation. Social norms on this view give us at best a
rough approximation of what should be done, and thus the authentic
person realizes that “social norms are not rules to be rigidly
followed” (Dreyfus 2017: 40).
The
transcendental
approach interprets authenticity as the
recognition of reasons and norms
as such
(rather than merely
acting in accordance with norms; see, e.g., Crowell 2013: 277; but see
Golob’s critique of the transcendental approach in Golob 2025:
159 ff.).
Blattner argues for a notion of authenticity as
“self-ownership”, where to own oneself means “to be
loyal
to who one now finds oneself to be” (Blattner
2013: 333). McManus similarly argues that “authentic
Being-towards-death is a readiness to be what I am now, for that to
have been me” (McManus 2015a: 259). McManus later elaborates on
this view by arguing that the authentic person makes herself
answerable for her actions by deciding what to do through an
“all-things-considered judgment” that “pulls
together … all the demands that [her situation] makes upon
her” (McManus 2019: 1195).
Guignon argues for a
narrative
account. “Instead of
tumbling into the frenzy and preoccupations of day-to-day
existence”, Guignon argues, the authentic individual
“lives each moment as part of the totality of life, and carries
forward the past as part of a coherent, cumulative narrative”
(Guignon 2000: 89).
Finally, commentators like Käufer and Wrathall emphasize the
connection between authenticity and Heidegger’s account of fluid
agency. Käufer explains that the authentic self is the self who
“discloses possibilities that solicit only her, insofar as they
are her own and are meaningful only on condition of her own guilty
commitment” (Käufer 2021a: 76). Wrathall similarly argues
that the Heideggerian self in general is a particular style of
polarizing the affordances of a situation into particular
solicitations to act (see Wrathall 2017b: 22). The inauthentic self
discloses the solicitations to act that the conformist anyone would
respond to. Authenticity, by contrast, consists in disclosing
situations in terms of the affordances and solicitations that allow me
to be the individual I have chosen to be.
For all their differences, each of these interpretations of
authenticity agrees that the authentic self achieves a certain kind of
integrity or “self-constancy” in contrast to the
inauthentic anyone-self, who acts in ways that conform to publicly
shared norms and expectations. Everyday Dasein acquiesces in pursuing
whatever possibilities “may accidentally thrust themselves upon
one” (SZ 264). This means that, rather than achieving an
individual wholeness or coherence to its character, it finds itself
“dispersed into the anyone”—into the tasks that one
is expected to perform. The inauthentic person lets her life be
“‘lived’ by the common-sense ambiguity of that
publicness in which nobody resolves upon anything but which has always
made its decision” (SZ 299).
The authentic person, by contrast, owns up to the responsibility for
their own choices. This embrace of responsibility, Heidegger argues,
is made possible by “the anticipation of death”, and by
“taking over guilt in resoluteness” (see, e.g., SZ
305).
2.4.1 Death
The anticipation of death, Heidegger argues, “individualizes
Dasein down to itself” (SZ 263). But few issues in
Being and
Time
have proven more controversial than explaining
Heidegger’s account of death and its relation to
authenticity.
For starters, Heidegger distinguishes between several different kinds
of “death”. This is because, Heidegger argues, different
kinds of entities end in different ways. Merely living things come to
an end when some event or process occurs that renders their bodies
incapable of continued organic functioning. Heidegger calls this
“perishing” (
Verenden
; SZ 240–241; see
Blattner 1994: 53). But, Heidegger argues, “Dasein never
perishes” because its kind of ending is “codetermined by
its primordial kind of being” (SZ 247). The point is
straightforward: defining Dasein’s death requires an
understanding of what is distinctive about Dasein’s existence.
Focusing on organic breakdown misses this.
But Heidegger draws a further distinction between the end of a human
life, which he dubs “demise” (
Ableben
), and death
Tod
) proper. Demise is an event that befalls a
person
, and renders her incapable of playing social and legal
roles, of having experiences, or pursuing
goals.
Heidegger calls demise “an intermediate phenomenon”, one
that participates both in characteristics of perishing, and in
characteristics of death in Heidegger’s specific sense.
Death proper befalls not us
qua
persons, but us
qua
Dasein. In distinguishing death from demise, Heidegger defines death
as “
the possibility of the absolute impossibility of
Dasein
” (SZ 250, emphasis supplied; see also SZ 329; SZ
262; SZ 306).
The death/demise distinction is important for Heidegger, because he
takes it as a mark of inauthenticity that one fixates on demise to the
exclusion of a proper relationship to
death.
But some commentators argue that there is in fact no meaningful
distinction to be drawn between death and demise. Philipse dismisses
the distinction as “a mesmerizing play with words” that
“does not contain significant philosophical insight”
(Philipse 1998:
354).
Other commentators, however, defend the idea that there is an
important distinction to be drawn between death and demise. For
instance, the “existential death interpretation” (or
“EDI”) holds that the phenomenon Heidegger’s names
“death” should be understood as the collapse of an
individual’s defining projects and commitments, while
“demise” names the absolute cessation of Dasein. EDI quite
rightly highlights the fact the we humans ordinarily understand
ourselves in terms of our existential projects and social roles. EDI
thus argues that a breakdown in our ability to inhabit those roles
amounts to an “existential
death”.
When existential death strikes, “the meanings that once
structured one’s life…, the possibilities that once
beckoned, and the demands one once felt have become inert”
(Blattner 2006: 149).
On this view of death, it is possible to survive or “live
through” your existential death because a Dasein can continue to
even when it no longer “exists” in the
specific sense of inhabiting a social role (Blattner 2005: 315).
Indeed, Thomson argues that death is something I
must
live
through in order to become authentic. This is because “in the
phenomenon of existential death, our selves get stripped of the
positive, worldly contents they ordinarily seem to possess”,
thereby liberating us to choose our own stand on being (Thomson 2021:
218; Thomson 2013: 273).
Other commentators adopt a dual-aspect approach to death—that
is, “death” and “demise” are understood as
naming two aspects of one and the same complete phenomenon. For
instance, Mulhall interprets “demise” as naming
Dasein’s “biological or organic end” (Mulhall 2013:
124). “Death” is that same end, but viewed in its modal
aspects: “we must shift our analytical focus from death
understood as an actuality to death understood as a possibility”
(Mulhall 2013: 125). Similarly, Wrathall argues that the difference
between death and demise is the difference between a possibility and
the particular instantiation of that
possibility.
On this modal interpretation, Heidegger’s analysis of death is
meant to lead us to the recognition of the radical finitude of the
possibilities open to us. Facing up to my modal finitude forces me to
confront my responsibility for being who I am. Because I am temporally
finite, each choice comes at a cost—to pursue one possibility
necessarily involves forgoing other possibilities (SZ 285). And death
reveals that no possible way of existing solves the core problem of
existence—namely, that it will end (see, e.g., GA80.1: 144). In
that sense, there is no objectively valid way to exist. And that
throws back on me the responsibility of deciding for myself how to go
on (GA80.1: 144).
Heidegger emphasizes the close relationship between anxiety and death.
Anxiety is the mood in which I experience immediately the finitude of
my future horizon of
possibilities.
Inauthentic Dasein flees from this experience of nothingness,
doubling down on its conformist adherence to everyday norms and
identities. It seeks in this way reassurance that it is living as one
is supposed to (SZ 267–8).
But authentic Dasein experiences in its finitude a liberating chance
to take ownership of itself. Rather than fleeing from death, authentic
existence will
anticipate
run forward toward
death (SZ 266). Anticipation does not involve “brooding
over” death, or “thinking about death” and
“pondering over when and how this possibility may perhaps be
actualized” (SZ 261). Instead, anticipation consists in actively
taking up and pursuing my finite existence
finite. This
liberates me from feeling bound to whichever possibilities
may accidentally thrust themselves upon one;… for the first
time one can authentically understand and choose among the factical
possibilities lying ahead of that possibility which is not to be
outstripped. (i.e., death; SZ 263)
2.4.2 Guilt and Resoluteness
Besides death, another fundamental source of finitude in human
existence is our “thrownness” into factical determinacy.
Heidegger argues that one is “
never
in control of
one’s own being from the ground up” (SZ 284). Käufer
notes: “We cannot determine or control biological or cultural
factors that constrain the possibilities available to us”
(Käufer 2015:
109).
Heidegger argues that such factical thrownness places me in a state of
existential guilt—a state of lacking justification for the being
that I am. We always find ourselves already saddled with preferences,
dispositions, and character traits that we did not choose. Or, to the
extent we can choose such things, we can only choose on the basis of
other preferences and dispositions that, for their part, we did not
choose. Consequently, my basic or default state as a factical being is
one in which I have an illusion of acting for reasons, but my reasons
are not my own. At the same time, as Han-Pile points out, my facticity
underdetermines who I am:
I don’t have any essence in the traditional sense of inalienable
properties which, in conjunction with various empirical laws, would
determine my comportment causally. (Han-Pile 2013: 302)
But this presents a problem: how can I express myself as an individual
if I am never ultimately in control of my dispositions; if all of the
norms to which I am beholden are inherited from the anyone; and if I
have no fixed, inalienable character to which I must
adhere?
It is the call of conscience, Heidegger argues, that calls me back to
the possibility of being my own self by forcing me to confront my
existential guilt. There is considerable disagreement on how precisely
this call is to be understood. Blattner, for instance, argues for a
“transcendental” understanding of conscience, according to
which “to have a conscience … is to be called upon to
respond to norms” (Blattner 2015: 119). Crowell similarly reads
conscience as that “by means of which we are able to think and
act not merely in accord with norms but in light of them”
(Crowell 2013: 170). Wrathall, by contrast, argues that the call works
by showing me that there are no norms which can justify my existence.
I take responsibility not because I must act in the light of norms,
but by owning the fact that there are no norms that can tell me who I
should
be.
To hear the call authentically, Heidegger argues, is
authentically to be
the ‘guilty’ that you
are” (SZ 287). That is, I become myself by first owning the fact
that I can escape neither from my thrownness, nor from the lack of
justification for my existence that comes with that thrownness. I then
make up for acquiescing in the norms of the anyone by “choosing
to choose to be a self” (SZ 270). Heidegger dubs such a choice
resoluteness
”. As Han-Pile explains, “the
choice of choosing oneself is made wholeheartedly in the sense that
Dasein takes without reservation as much responsibility for itself as
is allowed by its finitude” (Han-Pile 2013: 304).
In anxiety in the face of death, then, I disclose myself as defined by
a particular, finite set of possibilities, each of which is
unavoidably prone to nullity. In
anticipating my death
, I
accept this finitude and thereby liberate myself to choose my own
projects without the illusion that, existentially speaking, one choice
is any better or worse than
another.
In the call of conscience, I disclose myself as lacking any adequate
justification for the being that I am. In
resolutely taking over
my existential guilt
, I choose to be a self in full light of the
fact that I will never be in a position to shed responsibility for my
existence.
In anticipatory resoluteness, I integrate my projects and
dispositions in such a way that I achieve “the constancy of the
self”—i.e., a stable, individualized way of
being-in-the-world.
Together, anticipation and resoluteness free me to resolve upon some
set of possibilities that I have inherited from my world, and then
work to take those possibilities over in an individual way. Following
Kierkegaard, Heidegger calls this process of taking over in an
individualized way a received form of existence
“repetition” (see Watts 2021).
2.5 Temporality
The ultimate aim of the
Being-and-Time
project is to show
that all kinds of being, and thus also being as such, are conditioned
by and make sense in terms of their temporal structure. In the extant
portions of
Being and Time
, however, Heidegger is primarily
concerned with identifying the definitive and essential temporal
structure of our human form of existence.
Heidegger argues that all human actions and experiences are temporally
structured in that they involve a “retention” of the past
and an “awaiting” of the future that together inform how
the present shows up as soliciting us to respond (Heidegger refers to
this as “a making-present that awaits and retains”; SZ
355).
Building a birdhouse; carrying on a conversation; listening to a
symphony—all such activities involve responding in the present
on the basis of the awaited future and the retained past (see SZ 353).
Time thus structures all of our aims and activities: it is “the
self’s way of letting itself be concerned about anything”
(GA21: 339).
In addition, human existence is temporally structured in that to
understand myself
a self involves recognizing myself as
something that retains its identity across time. “Time”,
Heidegger notes “posits the self as the one that can be
encountered by something” (GA21: 340; see also GA25: 151
ff.).
In situating his account of human temporality, Heidegger identifies
several different types of temporality which stand in a hierarchy of
more or less fundamental forms. In order of decreasing fundamentality,
these include:
Temporality with an upper-case ‘T’
Temporalität
)—time as “the condition of the
possibility of the understanding of being and of ontology as
such”
(GA24: 324);
temporality with a lower-case ‘t’
Zeitlichkeit
)—Dasein’s temporal structure, in
virtue of which we are simultaneously ahead-of-ourselves,
already-being-in (a world) and being-amidst (entities encountered in
the world) (SZ 327);
“world-time”—“the time within
which worldly events and natural processes in the narrower sense
fall” (GA21: 248);
“the ordinary understanding of
time”—also known as “now-time”, or time
understood as a flowing stream of now-moments. (SZ 330–1)
and
“the traditional [or philosophical] time
concept”—time as a neutral container of changes, measured
out by now-moments, which moments are dimensionless points used to
demarcate and count change.
Heidegger argues that
(3)-(5)
are derived from Dasein’s
temporality (2)
Since Aristotle, philosophers have conceived of time as the universal
“container” or “coordinator” of the experience
of change or motion. And Heidegger too thinks of world-time as
“an embracing horizon within which that which is given can be
ordered with respect to its succession” (GA24: 356–7).
But, for him, temporality does more than merely “contain”
changes. It also plays a constitutive role in disclosing entities and
events. Time determines the significance of situations by setting them
in relation to the no-longer, the not-yet, and the now. To make sense
as an entity is to show up in relation to temporal horizons.
The ordinary understanding of time misunderstands the constitutive
role of time because it flattens time down to “a manifold and
succession of nows” (GA24: 385). The nows “arrive and
disappear like entities, they pass away like something occurrent into
what is no-longer-occurrent” (GA24: 385). But, Heidegger argues,
the focus on a “bare” succession of now moments covers up
the full rich experiential qualities of world-time. World-time,
Heidegger argues, “can be structurally and completely
characterized” in the following way: “it is datable,
spanned, public, and belongs as structured in this way to the world
itself [i.e., it is significant]” (SZ 414). For an extended
elaboration of Heidegger’s account of world-time, see Herrmann
2023: 183ff.
In saying that times are
datable
, Heidegger means that each
moment of time is defined by the events that have occurred, may yet
occur, or are occurring at that moment. Each moment is also defined by
its relations to other moments of time (see SZ 407). To say that time
spanned
is to observe that moments are not experienced as
dimensionless points. They stretch from the previous moment to the
subsequent moment, and they have a “varying span” that is
determined by the events occurring within them:
“‘now’—during the recess, while one is eating,
in the evening, in summer; ‘then’—at breakfast,
while climbing, and so forth” (SZ 409). Thus, Heidegger argues,
“no now and no time-moment can be punctualized. Every
time-moment is spanned within itself, whereby the span’s breadth
is variable” (GA24: 373).
Because times take their character from changes in the entities and
events that date them, and because those entities and events are
accessible to others, the nows are also
public
: they are
shared by everyone within the world and experienced as given, and we
can use them to reckon on each others actions (see SZ
412–3).
Finally, to say that time has
significance
is to say that one
time differs from another in terms of its appropriateness or
unsuitability for specific worldly activities. World-time thus always
shows up as a time that “has innately the character of
‘the time for something’ or ‘the inopportune time
for something’” (SZ 414).
Originary temporality, by contrast, consists not in a sequence or flow
of now-moments, but in our holding open and “ecstatically”
being carried away toward horizons of meaning that inform our
understanding of entities or of being. Dasein
“temporalizes” by purposively “awaiting” the
future, dispositionally “retaining” the past, and
concernfully engaging with the present (see SZ 407). It is only for a
being that is open to horizons like these, Heidegger contends, that
ordinary time can be manifest. That is, world-time can only be
datable, spanned, public and significant because Dasein is the kind of
being that can hold open the domain within which time moments relate
to each other. Heidegger thus refers to Dasein’s temporality as
“original time” or “primordial time”
ursprüngliche Zeit
), while world-time “arises
from” or is derived from temporality “temporalizing”
itself (see SZ 329).
Scholars have debated how successful Heidegger is in identifying
“an ontological meta-level” of originary temporality
(Fleischer 1991: 25). Fleischer argues flatly that “there is no
originary temporality” (Fleischer 1991: 25; for a response to
Fleischer, see Dahlstrom 1995).
Blattner argues that Heidegger’s account of the derivation of
world-time from primordial temporality fails. This is because,
Blattner maintains, there is one feature of world-time that cannot be
derived from temporality: the
sequentiality
of the flow of
now-moments. Heidegger insists emphatically that the future, present,
and past (or “beenness”) of originary time are horizons,
not events. They do not happen in a sequence (SZ 329). But when we
find a specific time to be significant and datable, this is because we
are aware of the sequential relations between times. “This
sequence of world-time times”, however, is not fixed by any
feature of Dasein’s temporality (Blattner 1999: 181–2).
Thus, Blattner contends, “there is a residuum of unexplained
‘time-likeness’, namely, sequentiality, in the sense of
‘one-after-the-other-ness’” (Blattner 1999: 184).
Blattner concludes that Heidegger’s effort to derive world-time
from Dasein’s temporality is a failure, and suggests that the
entire explanatory project of
Being and Time
fails along with
it (Blattner 1999: 232).
A variety of responses to Blattner’s critique have been
advanced. McMullin has argued that it is the public and thus shared,
intersubjective character of temporality that explains the
sequentiality of world-time. “Sequentiality”, she argues,
“depends on the recognition of times other than my
own—
nows other than this now
” (McMullin 2013:
126–7).
Rousse, following a suggestion by Dreyfus, argues that the
sequentiality of world-time is a composite product of Dasein’s
temporality and a sequentiality present in the “movements of
nature” that exists quite independently of Dasein. Rousse thus
concludes that
the composite intertwining of the endogenous sequentiality of events
in nature and Dasein’s originary temporality gives rise to the
linear sequence of meaningful moments that Heidegger calls
“world-time”…. In other words, world-time is a
co-production
of Dasein’s non-sequential originary
temporality and the endogenous sequentiality of events in nature.
(Rousse 2022: 206)
Because Dasein is temporal, Heidegger argues, it can also
“historize”—that is, we always encounter situations
on the basis of a set of dispositions, skills, practices, and projects
that we have inherited from our community—a community that
itself is a vibrant embodiment of the past. This past, in turn, opens
up a set of possibilities which determine the significance of, and
delimit the availability of, the options for action that are open to
us at any given moment. In this way, we exist as beings who always
have a future in terms of a past that has been “handed
down” to us (see SZ 385ff.; Watts 2021: 635).
2.6 Reality
One of the enduring problems in modern philosophy concerns the reality
or ideality of the so-called “external world”. In
Being and Time
, Heidegger argues that philosophical debates
between realists and idealists exhibit a deep confusion that results
from a failure to distinguish between different kinds of being (in
particular, between the occurrent, the available, and Dasein).
To help sort through this confusion, Heidegger distinguishes four
questions that pick out different issues in the general problem of the
reality of the external world:
Q1.
Are there mind-transcendent entities?
Q2.
Can we prove the reality of the external world?
Q3.
Can we know the external world as it is in itself?
Q4.
Is reality dependent on us—that is, on Dasein’s
understanding of
being?
With regard to the first two questions, Heidegger argues that both are
based on an ontological muddle.
presupposes that we are subjects, locked in the “cabinet of
consciousness” (SZ 62), trying somehow to establish contact with
occurrent entities. As Cerbone points out,
any question of how something in a “subject’s”
“inner sphere” relates to something “outer”
requires some antecedent justification for raising the question of
knowledge in those terms. (Cerbone 2005: 253)
Once we understand that we are beings-in-the-world—and that
means that standing in relation to worldly entities is a constitutive
condition of our own existence—then this undermines the
motivation to doubt that available entities exist.
Regarding
Heidegger argues along the same lines that the whole project of
proving the reality of the external world aims to demonstrate the
occurrentness and thus Dasein-independence of the world. But if the
world—that wherein Dasein dwells—is properly understood as
constituted
in relationship to
Dasein, then we can see how
muddled it is to try to demonstrate the world’s independent
reality. The scandal of philosophy is not, (as Kant had it), that
philosophers have failed to refute skepticism about the world.
The “scandal of philosophy” is … that such proofs
are expected and attempted again and again. Such expectations, aims,
and demands arise from an ontologically inadequate starting point. (SZ
205)
and
show, however, that we can still raise skeptical questions about our
understanding of the occurrent, even if doubts about the existence of
the available and of the world are dismissed. Q3 can be heard as
asking: do we have any way of encountering occurrent entities as
world-independent substances with world-independent properties (i.e.,
the purely occurrent)? Scholars are divided on how best to read
Heidegger’s answer to this question. (See, e.g., Glazebrook
2001a, 2001b; Rouse 1981; Dreyfus 2017: 109ff.)
forces us to consider the implications of Heidegger’s view that
being depends on Dasein. After all, a central tenet of
Being and
Time
is the claim that entities depend for their being on
being.
Heidegger also holds that being depends on
Dasein.
Given those commitments, one might expect Heidegger to offer an
idealist response to
& Q4—to insist, that is, that the real is dependent on us,
and thus that we cannot know the real as it is in itself. But,
contrary to expectation, Heidegger argues that “entities are
independent of the experience, familiarity, and grasping through which
they are disclosed, discovered, and determined” by us (SZ
183).
Not surprisingly, these claims have generated a wide variety of
interpretations of Heidegger’s considered response to
and
Dreyfus has argued that Heidegger is a “robust realist”,
meaning that he is committed to the idea
that science can in principle give us access to the functional
components of the universe as they are in themselves in distinction
from how they appear to us on the basis of our daily concerns, our
sensory capacities, and even our way of making things intelligible.
(Dreyfus 2017: 109–10)
Glazebrook also views Heidegger as a “robust realist”,
albeit one who “holds antirealist assumptions”—for
instance, that “the idea of a reality independent of
understanding is unintelligible” (Glazebrook 2001b: 362).
Carman has argued for an “ontic realist” interpretation of
Heidegger, according to which entities depend on being for their
intelligibility but not for their bare existence (Carman 2003:
158).
Blattner and Han-Pile have argued that Heidegger is an
“ontological idealist” or a “transcendental
idealist” who, like Kant, distinguishes between empirical and
transcendental standpoints from which to try to answer questions like
Q3 and Q4. From the empirical standpoint we can see that occurrent
entities do not depend on us for their causal properties. But,
Blattner argues, from the transcendental standpoint we end up
suspending our ability to pose meaningfully the question whether
entities depend on us. Thus, Blattner concludes, Heidegger is neither
an idealist nor a realist about
entities
, because the
question whether the real depends on us for its mere existence is
“unanswerable” (Blattner 1999: 242ff.). Han-Pile does not
think that Q3 is unanswerable. But she does argue that any reference
to the real “must remain purely negative” (Han-Pile 2005:
97).
McDaniel agrees that Heidegger is a kind of idealist about
being—that “being and modes of being are creatures of
Dasein’s
understanding
” (McDaniel 2016: 317).
But, he argues, entities
are
in a “different way”
than being, and thus “there are possible situations in which
physical objects exist and no Dasein does” (McDaniel 2016: 317).
Gabriel similarly holds that Heidegger is an ontological anti-realist,
having tied being to the understanding, while rejecting ontic
anti-realism (Gabriel 2015: 198).
Cerbone argues that Heidegger’s intent is “to overthrow
both [realism and idealism]” because both ultimately “take
for granted the legitimacy of the subject-object distinction, and seek
to explain one in terms of the other” (Cerbone 1995, 418).
2.7 Truth
Being and Time
, Heidegger articulates an understanding of
truth that shapes much of his subsequent thought. There are two
aspects to Heidegger’s account of truth; we might call these
the Historical Thesis
and
the Thematic Thesis
respectively.
The Historical Thesis
holds that early Greek thinkers like
Parmenides and Heraclitus understood truth as unconcealment—that
is, as bringing things out of concealment into the open. Heidegger
claims, moreover, that the Greek word for
truth—
alētheia
—reflects this primordial
understanding. Heidegger (and others) take
alētheia
etymologically speaking, as a privative word:
a-lētheia
is that which is un-hidden (see Friedländer 1964 [1969/1973:
221–2]). Heidegger claims that it was only
later—“from the time of Aristotle, or rather
Plato”—that “the name
alētheia
abruptly became the designation of the correctness of the
proposition” (GA45: 99–100).
Heidegger’s historical thesis, as well as his etymology of
alētheia,
was pointedly criticized by Friedländer.
In the 1954 edition of his book on Plato, Friedländer argued
contra
Heidegger that “the Greek concept of truth did
not undergo a change from the unhiddenness of being to the correctness
of perception” (Friedländer 1954 [1958: 220]). As it turns
out, both Heidegger and Friedländer ended up moderating their
historical claims. For his part, Friedländer ultimately conceded
that “it has become clear that the aspect of unhiddenness most
stressed by Heidegger was present very early” (Friedländer
1964 [1969/1973: vii]). And Heidegger conceded that the earliest Greek
thinkers did not recognize the significance of the word
alētheia
The Thematic Thesis
holds that (regardless of the way that
the early Greeks understood truth) the structure of truth in general
is best understood as unconcealment. Heidegger identifies at least
four different kinds of truth that participate in the logic of
unconcealment:
(1)
Propositional truth
: an assertion or belief is true when
it “points out” or uncovers an entity in a state of
affairs. (see SZ 218; GA21: 112–3)
Heidegger claims, however, that assertions can only uncover a state of
affairs if there prevails a broader, pre-linguistic uncovering of
entities that Heidegger calls:
(2)
Ontic truth
: an entity is uncovered
what it
is on the basis of our having well-articulated practices for
encountering it—that is, it can show up as what it is because we
know how to cope with it, have the right dispositions for using and
responding to it, and so on.
Uncovering
entities
, however, requires the disclosure of
being
—i.e.,
(3)
Ontological truth
: “Ontological truth is the
primordial truth about entities, because it discloses in advance what
is essential about the being of entities”. (GA25: 193)
In his later work, Heidegger further elaborates on the
“primordial essence of truth” by developing an account of
the conditions under which a particular understanding of being can
prevail. This leads him to the phenomenon of
(4)
Truth as clearing
, i.e., the unconcealment of historical
worlds or historical understandings of being (e.g., the medieval
Christian style of being, the modern style of being, the technological
style of being). (See, e.g., GA65: 422–3; Sikka 2021)
Withy has argued, however, that the clearing is not a genuine
phenomenon of
unconcealment.
Heidegger argues that propositional truth is best understood as one
species of a broader genus of unconcealment, and he tends to use the
words ‘truth’ and ‘unconcealment’
interchangeably, with the word ‘truth’ functioning as a
general term to refer to any kind of unconcealment. Tugendhat, amongst
others, criticized Heidegger for losing sight of a specific and core
quality of truth: truth, unlike unconcealment, is specifically opposed
to falsehood. Tugendhat also charged Heidegger with illegitimately
transfering the normative status of truth to the unconcealment of
being (see Tugendhat 1967). The validity of Tugendhat’s critique
has been much debated (see Dahlstrom 2001: 394ff.; Wrathall 2011:
34ff.) For his part, Heidegger eventually conceded that it is
“misleading” to call any type of unconcealment
“truth” (see GA14: 86 / OTB 70). But Heidegger never
abandoned the fundamental contours of his view about
unconcealment.
Because Heidegger understands propositional truth as uncovering, he
departs in an important respect from many prominent theories of
propositional truth. While preserving the idea that assertions get it
right about how things are, he rejects theories of correspondence
which understand correspondence as a relationship that obtains between
a mental representation and a state of
affairs.
Rather, a disclosive stance agrees or “corresponds” with
the world when it allows the state of affairs to show itself as it is
in itself. Heidegger explains:
correspondence is ultimately comportment’s tuning-itself-in
… to that which it comports itself toward…. From this it
follows: truth as such a correspondence is not a character of the
assertion as assertion, but rather of the assertion as comportment.
(GA80.1:
353)
Commentators differ on whether such passages indicate that Heidegger
holds on to a suitably redefined notion of
correspondence
(see, e.g., Wrathall 2011: 47 ff.), or whether he rejects the concept
of correspondence in favor of a more naive view of truth as
correctness (see Carman 2015). But either way it is clear that
Heidegger does not reject the commonsensical idea that beliefs or
assertions are true in virtue of their agreement with the world.
“In proposing our ‘definition’ of
‘truth’ we have not shaken off the tradition”,
Heidegger insists, “but we have appropriated it
primordially” (SZ 220).
Because he thinks propositional truths are only expressible in the
light of an ontological disclosure, Heidegger questions the
universality of truth. If an assertion can only be true when certain
background conditions obtain, he argues that we should abandon the
idea of timeless propositional
truths.
At the same time, Heidegger insists that this does not lead to a
radical relativism or constuctivism about entities, because
[o]nce entities have been uncovered, they show themselves precisely as
entities which beforehand they already were. Such uncovering is the
kind of being which belongs to “truth”. (SZ 227; see also
GA24: 315 / 220–1)
Heidegger’s view, then, is that a propositional truth is
relative to a particular world disclosure, but that what is discovered
through the proposition is not necessarily produced in and through its
discovery.
2.8 The Unfinished Project of
Being and Time
As noted already, the extant text of
Being and Time
consists
principally of Heidegger’s account of
existence
, the
being of Dasein, and his preliminary working out of time as the ground
of existence. It also offers some indication of how the available and
the occurrent are rooted in different ways in which time is
“schematized” or “temporalizes itself” (see
Blattner 2021b: 759).
Left undone was the project of demonstrating that “
being at
large or in general
… is determined by time”
(Blattner 2021a:
727).
This was to have been accomplished in Division Three of Part I of
Being and Time
, regarded by Heidegger himself as “the
most important Division” of the entire work (GA49: 40). But
Division Three was never
published.
Also left undone was Part II of
Being and Time
“deconstruction” of various historical accounts of
ontology that was meant to show how, throughout the history of
metaphysics, time has been experienced as a fundamental determiner of
being (see SZ 22). In the years following the publication of
Being
and Time
, Heidegger did in fact make some efforts at this
historical deconstruction. He offered a series of lecture courses that
looked at the “problematic of temporality” in the work of
Aristotle, Descartes, Leibniz, and Kant (see, e.g., GA24, GA25, GA26,
and GA83). Heidegger focused on Kant in particular, arguing that
“Kant is the only philosopher who even suspected that the
understanding of being and its characteristics is connected with
time” (GA21: 194). At the same time, Heidegger concluded that
“Kant … held firm to the traditional concept of
time” and this “blocked him from achieving a fundamental
understanding of the problem” (GA21: 194). As Shockey explains,
Heidegger’s reading of Kant is premised on a
“violent” interpretive move: “Heidegger equates
[Kant’s conception of] imagination with SZ’s 'originary
temporality’,” and thus roots synthetic a priori knowledge
in temporality (Shockey 2021: 133). The resulting interpretation of
Kant, however, is nuanced, and there is considerable scholarly
disagreement over how best to characterize Heidegger’s Kant
interpretation.
In any event, within a few years of its publication in 1927, Heidegger
abandoned the project of
Being and Time
, conceding that
“it was a delusion” to think he could complete it (GA49:
40).
Scholars disagree on the reasons for Heidegger’s abandonment of
the project. Blattner suggests that Heidegger gave up the attempt to
show that all ontology is grounded in Dasein’s temporalizing
simply because “the argument for it does not work”
(Blattner 1999: 290).
Withy argues that the project failed because Heidegger had not
adequately recognized the self-concealing character of being:
“it is not just that we don’t fully ‘get’
being. It belongs to how being works that it withholds itself from us
and so makes itself question-worthy” (Withy 2015: 311).
Being and Time
, on this view, fails because it misses out on
“the most fundamental … feature of meaning: that it works
by effacing itself” (Withy 2015: 324).
Some scholars pin the blame on the transcendental-metaphysical style
Being and Time
—a style Heidegger soon came to
repudiate.
Thus Raffoul, for instance, argues that the abandonment of the
project represents not so much a failure as the recognition that what
it was after “could not be pursued within the structure,
language, and orientation of the 1927 treatise” (Raffoul 2015:
239, quoting GA9: 328).
Many scholars account for Heidegger’s abandonment of the project
by pointing to his new appreciation of the history of being. As
Thomson explains, Heidegger came to believe
that the ontological posits that guide each of our positive sciences
come not from some unchanging fundamental ontology beneath all of
Western history but rather from our contemporary age’s reigning
ontotheology. (Thomson 2015: 297)
And Heidegger, in retrospective commentaries on why he gave up on the
project, does indeed often single out the fact that he came to believe
that there is an historical dimension to ontology that his account in
Being and Time
missed.
To be specific, the account of temporality developed in
Being and
Time
could not account for the historical variation in
understandings of being:
History does not merely pass over into another epoch within the
previous time-frame (
Zeit-raum
) of metaphysics; rather the
time-frame itself becomes a different one (GA71:
76).
3. Nazi-Era Writings
The most controversial issue in contemporary discussions of
Heidegger’s work is that of determining the extent to which his
thought is compromised by the public and spectacular character of his
moral failings. Heidegger’s support for the National Socialist
movement, and his use of Nazi and anti-Semitic language and tropes,
has been amply documented and exposed (see Denker & Zaborowski
2009a; Ott 1988 ; Farias 1987 ; Faye 2005 ). It is
no longer possible to doubt that, as Julian Young puts it, Heidegger
was “a real Nazi: his involvement was a matter of conviction
rather than compromise, opportunism, or cowardice” (Young 1997:
4). He was also “an unabashed anti-Semite”, and “a
strong supporter of Hitler and the Nazis from 1930 through at least
1934” (Sheehan 2015a: 368). It is also now clear that, after the
war, Heidegger repeatedly lied or distorted the record to conceal the
character and depth of his political activities in support of the Nazi
movement during the Hitler regime. Moreover, he never publicly and
explicitly renounced his support for National Socialism. On the rare
occasions when he addressed the Holocaust, he deflected attention away
from the question of German guilt by, for instance, equating the Shoah
with the repressive Soviet occupation of East Germany.
While the basic facts of the Heidegger case are by now well-known,
there are widely disparate interpretations of the significance of
these facts for an understanding of Heidegger: was he a base
opportunist, taking advantage of a revolutionary movement to advance
his own aims? Was he politically naïve? Was he, as he later
claimed, hoping to use the rectorship to protect the university from
“unsuitable persons” and from “the threatening
supremacy of the party apparatus and the party doctrine” (GA16:
574–5)? Was he, as he also claimed, trying to temper the basest
impulses of the Nazi party, and lead the movement in a more positive
direction (see GA16: 377)? Or was he a true believer in Hitler and
Hitler’s National Socialism—an enthusiastic sympathizer
with and accomplice to the Nazi agenda for “German
rebirth”? There is a large and expanding literature devoted to
exploring these issues, and philosophers have staked out a very broad
range of positions on these questions (see Denker & Zaborowski
2009b; Bourdieu 1988 ; Ott 1988 ; Farias 1987 ;
Sluga 1993; Pöggeler 1990; Young 1997; Faye 2005 ; Sheehan
2015a). Nowhere has the debate over the scandal of Heidegger’s
National Socialism been more heated than in France—perhaps owing
to the depth and breadth of influence that Heidegger had on French
philosophy (see Janicaud 2001 ).
At one end of the spectrum, Young, maintains that Heidegger’s
philosophical works can be fully ‘de-Nazified’—that
Heidegger’s philosophical thought does not “stand in any
essential connection to Nazism” (Young 1997: 5). Moreover, Young
argues, “one may accept any of Heidegger’s philosophy, and
… preserve, without inconsistency, a commitment to orthodox
liberal democracy” (Young 1997: 5).
At the other extreme, Faye argues that it is “impossible to
dissociate [Heidegger’s work in its entirety] from his political
commitments”, and that Heidegger “dedicated himself”
to “the introduction into philosophy of the very content of
Nazism and Hitlerism” (Faye 2005 [2009: 7]). Indeed, Faye goes
so far as to contend that “Heidegger’s work is not at all
a ‘philosophy’”, that in his work “the very
principles of philosophy are abolished” (Faye 2005 [2009: 4
& 316]).
Claims that Heidegger’s work is not philosophical or
“destructive of philosophy” are belied by the fecundity of
his thought for ongoing philosophical research in a variety of fields
(including the phenomenology of perception and action, the philosophy
of mind, the philosophy of artificial intelligence and cognitive
science, ontology, the philosophy of time, the philosophy of art, the
history of philosophy, and moral psychology).
At the same time, the suspicions raised by Heidegger’s Nazi past
(and by his efforts to conceal that past) are too important to be
ignored by scholars and students of his work. There can be little
doubt that much of his work during the Nazi-era bears unmistakable
resonances and affinities with Nazi ideology. National
Socialism’s glorification of traditional rural German life, and
its rhetorical anti-modernism and anti-cosmopolitanism finds echoes in
Heidegger’s critique of technology (see
section 5.2
Nazi rhetoric of renewal and rebirth resonated with Heidegger growing
conviction that Western metaphysics had run its course, that another
beginning was needed (see
supplement: Heidegger and the Other Beginning
Indeed, Heidegger repeatedly rationalized his initial attraction to
the Nazi party on just this basis (see GA95: 407; GA16: 430; GA16:
374).
As many scholars have noted, Heidegger’s embrace of National
Socialism was tied up with his critique of technology. Habermas
claims, for instance, that “In 1935 Heidegger still saw the
inner truth and greatness of the National Socialist movement in the
‘encounter between global technology and modern
man’” (Habermas 1985 [1987: 159]). Heidegger eventually
came to view National Socialism as a “consummate form of
modernity”, the “triumph of machination” (GA96:
127). And that made National Socialism something that itself needed to
be overcome in the transition to a non-metaphysical form of dwelling
(see Habermas 1985 [1987: 159–60]). But decades later, Heidegger
continued to hold that “National Socialism did indeed go in the
direction” of “attaining an adequate relationship to the
essence of technology” (GA16: 677).
Perhaps the most significant and clearest point of affinity between
Nazi ideology and Heidegger’s writings during the Nazi era
centers on the
völkisch
ethno-nationalism that Heidegger
incorporated into his account of the history of being in the 1930s.
Consistently throughout his career, Heidegger was an
anti-individualist about meaning—that is, he argued that the
primary disclosure of being is social in character. In
Being and
Time
, it is “the anyone-self” who “articulates
the referential context of significance” in terms of which
entities are encountered (SZ 129), and “prescribes that way of
interpreting the world and being-in-the-world” (SZ 129). After
the war, it is neighborhoods and localities of mortals who disclose
the sense of things by dwelling together while gathered by the
fourfold. But for a time in the 1930s Heidegger argues that the
disclosive “we-self” is a
people
Volk
that shares a history, a soil, blood, a language, tasks,
possibilities, moods, and a destiny. Like the Nazis, Heidegger held a
racist and anti-Semitic conception of the essence of the German
people, although he rejected the Nazi’s biologistic conception
of race. Like other
völkisch
nationalists of the time,
Heidegger was convinced that the German people had a special destiny
in saving Western civilization. But for Heidegger, unlike the Nazis,
the leading role for the German people to play was that of overcoming
metaphysics and inaugurating a new history of being.
Heidegger’s arguments in favor of an ethno-nationalist account
of the disclosure of being are, however, unconvincing. One can grant
the communal character of human existence, accept that we are
essentially historical beings, and agree with an anti-individualist
account of the disclosure of being—all without tying that
disclosure to a particular ethnic group, people, nation, or state.
Heidegger arguments for a
völkisch
nationalism in his
lecture courses were sketchy at best. And already in the 1940s,
Heidegger came to view the ethno-nationalist conception of a people
das Völkische
) as a product of the subjectivity of
modern metaphysics (see, e.g., GA5: 111, GA54: 204).
At the same time, we should remain alive to the fact that
Heidegger’s account of the history of being, his critique of
technology, and his essay on the world-disclosive significance of
works of art, all came out of this period of Heidegger’s
adventures in ethno-nationalism. It would be irresponsible to not
sensitize ourselves to the question whether Heidegger’s
nationalist and racist views have affected or distorted his
understanding of history (including his critique of the technological
age).
4. The “Turning” and Heidegger’s Later Thought
Much of Heidegger’s work, early and late, turns on exploring our
role in disclosing being. In
Being and Time
, for instance,
Heidegger maintains that entities depend on being, while being depends
on us:
only as long as Dasein is (that is, only as long as an understanding
of being is ontically possible), “is there”
being
“gibt es” Sein
). (SZ 212)
After
Being and Time
, Heidegger writes of a
“turn” (
Kehre
) that, as Braver explains, refers
either to “a reversal of perspective, turning from
Dasein’s being to being itself”, or to “a
fundamental change in being’s relation to us” (Braver
2021: 783). After the turn, Richardson notes, Heidegger comes to hold
that
being is not something we accomplish ourselves; it doesn’t issue
from an act of projection in the strong sense of
Being and
Time
. And this is the element of realism in the original Greek
viewpoint: the clearing happens by our receiving being, not creating
it. (J. Richardson 2012: 219)
Even if we do not create being, so that it enjoys a certain
independence from us, Heidegger nevertheless continues to hold that
there is a sense in which being
needs
uses
us.
Being needs us to give it a setting within which it can prevail. It
needs us to “shelter” it, to stabilize it in entities. It
needs us to “build” a “place” where a
particular style of being can manifest itself (see, e.g., GA11:
117).
This “turn” as a shift with regard to questions of
ontological dependence corresponds to a change in Heidegger’s
prose style and his approach to philosophical argumentation.
Consequently, amongst scholars “‘the turn’ or
‘the turning’ has also accrued the meaning of a change
that took place in Heidegger’s writing and thinking”
(Braver 2021: 783). As Braver explains, however, “scholars
disagree about the precise timing, nature, extent, and even existence
of this turn in his work, but talk of an early Heidegger and a late
one remains fairly standard” (Braver 2021: 783).
There is also disagreement on how discontinuous Heidegger’s work
“post-turn” is with his “pre-turn” thought.
Withy, for instance, adopts as a basic interpretive commitment that
there is “a robust continuity in Heidegger's thought from early
to late” (Withy 2022: 4). Keiling, on the other hand, argues
that this type of
turn-narrative presents Heidegger’s philosophy as evolving in a
fundamentally continuous and coherent fashion, and therefore it covers
over rather than explains the numerous philosophical difficulties and
inconsistences Heidegger came to see in [
Being and Time
(Keiling 2025: 248)
Despite the inconsistencies, there are a number of ways in which
Heidegger’s work is continuous across the so-called turn. For
one thing, Heidegger across his entire career is interested in
understanding the interplay between unconcealment and concealment (see
Withy 2022).
Another enduring continuity in Heidegger’s thought is his
adherence to a fundamentally relationalist account of being. In
Being and Time
, entities are holistically constituted by
their relations—actual and possible, diachronic and synchronic,
causal and logical and motivational—to other entities,
activities, aims, and the unfolding of events. Being determines
entities as entities by providing a background against which certain
relations can show up as determinative for the intelligibility of
those entities.
Heidegger’s later thought on the unconcealment of being develops
and expands this relationalist account of being by arguing that being
has a history, and that this history is made up of a sequence of
fundamentally different styles for determining which relations are
ontologically basic. As Markus Gabriel explains,
For Heidegger, the world is, as it were, a question of style: the
world of the Aztecs and the world of French monarchy differ in style;
they are different worlds in that they are different overall ways of
making sense of how things are. (Gabriel 2015: 196–7)
In the process, the later Heidegger sets into motion a whole set of
concepts that are traditionally thought of as static: being undergoes
transformations; essences are not fixed, but they happen—an
essence essences (
das Wesen west
); worlds as whole coherent
settings for human existence arise, endure for a while, and then
collapse—a world worlds (
die Welt weltet
). And all of
this motion is governed by the “gentle law” of adaptation
Ereignis
Thus, after the “turning”, Heidegger is increasingly
interested in tracing out the succession of different styles or
understandings of being that make up a history of being. This seems to
be a fundamentally different approach to history than the
deconstruction of the history of philosophy that Heidegger attempted
in the years following the publication of
Being and Time
. But
even here, one can find continuities between Heidegger’s thought
Being and Time
, and in the later works. Bernhard Stiegler
has argued, for instance, that Heidegger’s later thought must
understood on … two levels at once: on the first, the
existential structure of Dasein, as a relation to time determined by
intratemporality;
on the second, as the destiny of the
Western history of being through the “metaphysical”
history of philosophy in which being is determined as presence and is
characterized by a “vulgar” understanding of time in terms
of the
now
of intratemporality. (Stiegler 1994 [1998: 4])
Nevertheless, as Zarader argues, the turn to history is driven by a
recognition that the analytic of Dasein is not an adequate foundation
for ontology. This is because being necessarily is forgotten or
withdrawn, and thus
it is no longer a question of reaching being from the entity in which
it gives itself (Dasein); it is a question of thinking being from the
history in which it withdraws. (Zarader 1986: 77)
Heidegger explains the dynamic emergence of new styles of being by
invoking the notion of a clearing. As Wrathall explains,
a new understanding of being can establish itself, and a new ordering
of beings can become operative, only if there is something like a
clearing that conceals any other way of experiencing the world in
order to allow this particular way to come to the forefront. (Wrathall
2011: 33)
The clearing, Heidegger insists, is not an “indeterminate
emptiness into which something ‘appears’”
(GA69:123). Rather, it is a very specific way of withholding some
possibilities of being so that the remaining possibilities of being
show up as the self-evident and natural way for entities to be. In
this way, a particular style or mode of being can prevail. But to
experience the prevailing possibilities of being as natural and
determinative for us, we cannot be aware that a clearing away of
alternate possibilities is going on. Thus, a clearing not only keeps
back other possibilities, it also keeps back
that
it is
keeping back other possibilities: it is not “the mere clearing
of presence, but the clearing of presence concealing itself, the
clearing of a self-concealing sheltering” (GA14: 88).
Another mark of the “turning” in Heidegger’s thought
is an increased attention to the role that artworks and poetry play in
disclosing being. In his essay on “The Origin of the Work of
Art”, Heidegger argues that “great” works of art
have a privileged part to play in establishing a new world within the
clearing. When great past works of art attracted enough
“preservers”, “a new and essential world
irrupted” (GA5: 65 / OTBT 48 / PLT 74). For a detailed
discussion of Heidegger’s “post-aesthetic thinking about
art”, see Thomson 2011: 41).
By presenting us with a shining and attractive exemplar of a new style
of being, a work can change the way we experience what things really
are and which aims and purposes are truly important (GA5: 60 / OTBT 45
/ PLT 70; see Dreyfus & Kelly 2011: 83). Drawing on
Hölderlin, Heidegger connects the poetic revelation of shining
things to a festival or holiday. “In the festive mode
(mood)”, Young explains,
[w]e step into wonder and adoration of the things that there are, into
gratitude for the fact that they are and that we are among
them…. [T]hings show up as belonging to a
sacred
order
and since they themselves share in this sacredness, command of us love
and respect. (Young 2001: 88)
Yet another mark of the “turning” in Heidegger’s
thought is his turn to language as a “a world-forming
power” that “first preforms the being of entities in
advance and brings them into a structure” (GA38A: 168). In
Being and Time
, Heidegger clearly viewed language as
derivative of a pre-linguistic articulation of the world (see
section 2.2.3.3
In the years after the publication of
Being and Time,
however, Heidegger argued for an essential interdependence between
being and what he called “originary language”. By 1932,
for instance, he held that “where there is no language, there is
no understanding of being” (GA35: 180). After the
“turning”, Charles Taylor has argued, Heidegger develops a
constitutivist theory of language: “language enters into or
makes possible a whole range of crucially human feelings, activities,
relations”, and thus “bursts the framework of
pre-linguistic life forms” (Taylor 2005: 437; see
supplement: Heidegger on language
Perhaps the most obscure aspect of Heidegger’s later work was
his effort to understand what moves or constitutes the sequence of
historical epochs of being. Heidegger pursues such themes in the form
of repeated meditations on
Ereignis
Ereignis
colloquial German means an event or an occurrence, but Heidegger goes
to great lengths to insist that the
Ereignis
that governs the
unconcealment of being is not to be thought of as something that
happens in the ordinary sense. A variety of other translations have
been proposed for
Ereignis
, including
‘appropriation’, ‘event of appropriation’,
‘coming into view’, and ‘adaptation’ (see
Wrathall 2021b for a discussion of the merits of these various
translations). For Heidegger, the root verb
eignen
—“to be adapted or suited”—is a
key to seeing that
Ereignis
names a tendency toward
adaptation, a tendency toward drawing things into a state of mutual
fittedness or “co-belonging” (see Dastur 1990). Dastur
explains:
Ereignis
, by making the unfolding of the being of the human
being as Da-sein visible in the clearing, brings mortals to their own
by making them appropriate (
vereignen
) to being which, for
its part, is suited (
zugeeignet
), that is to say, dedicated
to the being of the human being. (Dastur 1990: 111)
In thinking beyng, language, the clearing, and the history of being in
terms of adaptation, Heidegger holds that the essential
relations—the relations that define the essence of
something—are relationships of mutual fittedness. What an entity
, in other words, is a function of that for which it is
adapted (
eignet
) or suitable (
geeignet
). The
clearing that lets particular relations stand forth as definitive
“is never the effect of a cause nor the consequence of a
reason” (GA12: 247 / OWL 127). It is, instead,
“produced” or “brought forth” by adaptation
(see GA12: 246–7 / OWL 127–8). Adaptation thus can have
the sense of both a condition of suitedness or aptness or fittingness,
and a process that leads toward that condition of aptness. In the
latter sense, Heidegger argues that adaptation is the prevailing
tendency that governs the history of being. World-historical epochs
change when our most basic practices are disrupted, leading to a
process of reorienting ourselves to the relationships that are
definitive of our world.
5. The History of Being
Heidegger argues that ordinary history—the history of wars, of
the rise and decline of nations, of scientific advances and
discoveries, of changing artistic and cultural styles, of varying
philosophical systems and doctrines—is shaped by a history of
being. The history of being is a history of fundamental changes in the
way entities manifest themselves. In each historical age or epoch,
being has a different character or style: “‘being’
and ‘being’ respectively say something different in the
different epochs of its destiny” (GA10: 91). Human practices,
possibilities, and norms are profoundly shaped by the way that
entities are manifest in each
epoch.
Because the style of being is so fundamental in shaping the form of
life that prevails in an age, and because we do not determine the
style so much as receive it, Heidegger refers to the style of being as
a “fate” or a “destiny” (
Geschick
) or
a “sending” (
Schicken
). “The definition of
History as
Geschick
, destiny in the sense of
Schickung
, destination, the sending of being”, Michel
Haar explains,
is simply the recognition of the omnipotence of th[e] inaugural past
…. History is completed not only at its end but at its
commencement, in that it governs all that arises from it. (Haar 1987
[1993: 69–70])
Some critics of Heidegger, most notably Richard Rorty, have charged
that Heidegger’s talk of a history of being is vacuous, because
he does not validate his account of history through references to
ordinary historical events (Rorty 1982, 48). But, as Okrent notes,
while the history of being is “correlated with ordinary
history”, it is “not … simply a function of
ordinary history” (Okrent 2020: 292). And Heidegger does offer
some, admittedly sparse but nonetheless significant, indications of
the connection between the background understanding of being and the
foreground appearances that characterize the
age.
For the most part, however, Heidegger looks primarily to the history
of philosophy as the foundation for his account of the history of
being. This is because Heidegger holds that the doctrines of great
thinkers express, more directly and clearly than ordinary events, the
sense of being that sustains their
world.
There are three main periods to consider in Heidegger’s account
of the history of being.
The first period is the pre-metaphysical world of the pre-Socratic
Greeks. Heidegger refers to this as the “first beginning”
of Western thinking, because it fixes the trajectory of the
metaphysical epochs that follow. But, Heidegger insists, thinkers like
Anaximander, Heraclitus, and Parmenides are not themselves
metaphysical—they are “pre-metaphysical” or
“not-yet-metaphysical” (GA48: 334). On Heidegger’s
reading, pre-Socratic thought is “on the way to
metaphysics”, because it is concerned with the search for a
unified
prōtē archē
(GA55: 258, see Thomson
2005: 31). Philosophy emerges in the first beginning as responding to
a change in the background practices of the early Greek
world—namely, the emergence of a uniform style of being out of a
previously polytheist or pluralist understanding of what things are
and how they should be. Pre-Socratic thought is, however, “not
yet metaphysical” because thinkers like Anaximander, Heraclitus,
and Parmenides experienced being as unconcealment, or as emergence
into manifestness (GA 48: 334; see Wrathall & Lambeth 2011).
Metaphysics, in contrast to the pre-Socratics, is oblivious to the
dynamics of unconcealment.
The second period begins with the transition to metaphysics in the
“thinking of Plato and Aristotle”, and their “first
determination of the being of beings” (GA15: 378 / FS 68).
“From here on out”, Heidegger claims, “the entire
history of metaphysics is ordered as a succession of the various
fundamental forms of the being of entities” (GA15: 378–9 /
FS 68). This sequence of metaphysical epochs has reached its
consummation in the technological world.
The third and future period will only arise with the overcoming of
metaphysics and an “other beginning” of history—a
beginning that must necessarily take the form of a retrieval of paths
of thought that were incipient already in the first beginning, but not
taken (see, e.g., GA65: 504;
supplement: Heidegger and the Other Beginning
5.1 Metaphysics
The word “metaphysics” usually refers to a division of
academic philosophy alongside other branches of the discipline, such
as epistemology, ethics, aesthetics, etc. Used this way,
“metaphysics” names the branch of philosophy that inquires
into being, that is, into the first principles and the constitutive
categories of
entities.
When Heidegger uses the word “metaphysics” in his later
thought, however, he is rarely talking about a branch of philosophy.
He instead means one of two things. First, a “metaphysic”
a universal and all-encompassing style of structuring the
relations that define entities
“as such and as a
whole”. This for Heidegger is the core meaning of the word
“metaphysics” (see GA43: 288). “Humanity does not
‘have’ a ‘metaphysic’”, Heidegger
explains; rather, we exist “in the realm of a truth about
entities as such and as a whole, and that means that humanity is in
the sphere of control of a metaphysic” (GA76: 125).
Heidegger also uses the word “metaphysics” to refer to
a way of thinking
that grows out of and expresses or
represents a metaphysic in the previous sense. Philosophers can be
metaphysicians in this sense even when they are writing about ethics,
epistemology, aesthetics, etc.—provided that their views on the
latter subjects grow out of and express the prevailing metaphysic
(i.e., the prevailing, universal style of being; see, e.g., GA6.2: 104
/ N4 78 & GA55: 252). Plato, Aquinas, Descartes, Leibniz, Kant,
Hegel, and Nietzsche are amongst the most important
“metaphysical thinkers” in Heidegger’s estimation.
This is because their works express in the clearest way possible a
particular historico-ontological
style.
Consequently, when Heidegger writes about the history of metaphysics,
he is not referring to a sequence of doctrines or theories of being.
The history of metaphysics is primarily the history of the sequence of
distinct ways that entities show up as entities. As Heidegger
sometimes puts it, “metaphysics is the history of the [various]
imprintings of being (
Seinsprägungen
)” (GA14 / OTB
41).
Each metaphysical world has a coherent background sensibility for what
makes sense, what goals are worth pursuing, how entities are
organized, how actions are justified, what things are certain, and
what things are open to doubt. This background sensibility is embodied
in the organized contexts of equipment, activities, social roles, and
purposive ends that characterize a given age.
The primary feature of a metaphysic, then, is the existence of a
uniform ontological style
. When Heidegger claims that
“metaphysics begins covertly with the beginning of western
thinking” (GA66: 383), he means that, coincident with the
origins of western philosophy, all entities started to show up as
bearing a shared, all-encompassing ontological character.
Corresponding to this, human activities manifested a coherent
“style of being-there” (GA65: 34). The history of these
metaphysical epochs has a direction to it. As Richardson puts it,
“the overall tendency of being’s history is … the
most thorough
control
: things are, as they are when they are
subject to this fullest control” (J. Richardson 2012: 233).
Thus, each new metaphysic aims at improving our ability to anticipate
and plan and control the unfolding of events, culminating in the
technological age.
When it comes to metaphysics in the “derived” sense of a
“particular doctrinal presentation” of the prevailing
metaphysic,
Heidegger identifies several characteristics. First, a mark of a
metaphysical understanding of being is what Heidegger calls the
priority of entities over being
” (GA66: 88).
Metaphysical thinkers arrive at a conception of being by abstracting
from entities their most general characteristic. When being is
understood as a property abstracted from existing entities, Heidegger
calls it “beingness”. Being as “beingness” is
the most universal property possessed by entities, one shared by
everything that is. But because beingness is abstracted from the style
of being prevailing in the current epoch, any given metaphysical
thinker grasps only one style of the manifestation of entities:
“each metaphysic is based on a fundamental experience of
entities, which is peculiar to each thinker” (GA15: 313 / FS
26). Consequently, what metaphysical thinkers miss is the dynamic
character of
“beyng”
which “absolutely evades being grasped on the basis of
entities” (GA51: 60).
A second characteristic of a metaphysical doctrine is that
“beingness is understood as constant presence” (GA31: 61).
In other words, “an entity is what shows itself in constancy and
presence” (GA65:
191).
As Richardson explains, an entity is present when we achieve a
“close firm grip” on it (J. Richardson 2012: 219). So to
treat being as presence is to define the being of an entity in terms
of those properties which allow us to achieve such a grip. For Plato,
for instance, we get our best grip on entities when we understand the
forms, which are the unchanging source of the intelligibility of the
world; to
is to instantiate a form. In modernity we get
our best grip on entities when they “surrender to representation
and production” (GA95: 236). So to
in the modern
world is to be representable and producible/manipulable. And in the
technological age, entities are most present when we can set them on
call so that they are readily available for consumption and use (see,
e.g., GA79: 40, 46). So to
in the technological world is
to be an orderable resource.
Some commentators take Heidegger as himself endorsing the claim that
being is presence (see, e.g., Olafson 1987; Blattner 1999: 289).
Carman argues persuasively, however, that
the interpretation of being as presence was precisely the
misunderstanding that Heidegger initially sought to correct and
overcome, but which he subsequently regarded as the fundamental
interpretive turn in the constitution of the metaphysical tradition.
(Carman 1995, 451; see GA8: 142 / WCT 236)
For Derrida, however, Heidegger’s continual reliance on the
notion of presence in his account of the history of being shows that,
despite his best efforts, Heidegger himself “remains within the
metaphysics of presence” (Derrida 1972 [1982: 65]).
A third characteristic of a metaphysical understanding of being is its
oblivion to emergence
. Because entities show up as simply
what there is, inhabitants of a metaphysical world take the prevailing
style of being as something necessary. In metaphysics, there is no
recognition of the contingency of the prevailing style of
being.
Nor is there a recognition of our role in disclosing being. As Young
puts it, “the crucial truth metaphysics misses is the dependence
of being on human being” (Young 2002: 27).
A fourth mark of a metaphysical understanding of being is its
cognitivism
—i.e., it takes it for granted that what
entities truly are is capturable or specifiable through concepts,
graspable in abstract thought, and expressible in propositional
language. Metaphysics, as Heidegger puts it, thinks of truth “in
the already derivative form of the truth of cognitive knowledge and
the truth of propositions that formulate such knowledge” (GA9:
370).
Heidegger argues that the history of the West from Plato to the
present has been punctuated by a sequence of four or five distinct
epochs, each with its own overarching ontological style. These include
the Greek, the Roman, Christendom, the Modern, and the Technological
epoch.
For a more detailed discussion of these distinct epochs in the
history of being, see Wrathall 2021e; Thomson 2011b: 107–8;
Carman 2019: 153.
Heidegger’s preoccupation with the history of metaphysics is
primarily driven by the need to understand our current technological
epoch. So we will focus here on the “final stage” in the
history of being—the technological
age.
5.2 Technology
For Heidegger, the proliferation of technological devices is a
superficial phenomenon which conceals an underlying change in the
understanding of being. “In all technological happenings”,
Heidegger argues, “a sense rules, a sense which lays claim to
human actions and omissions, and which was not first invented and made
by human beings” (GA16: 526 / DT 55). The “sense”
which “claims us” in the technological age—what it
ultimately makes sense to do—is to order all things, and to
place them at our disposal in a maximally flexible way, so that we can
smoothly and reliably pursue whatever aim we happen to fix on in any
given moment. This sense prevails, Heidegger argues, because of a
fundamental change in the way entities are disclosed.
5.2.1 The Technological Mode of Revealing
In analyzing the technological “way of revealing”,
Heidegger focuses on (a) the fundamental
mood
or attunement
that prevails in the technological world; (b) the
basic
characteristic
of entities—the way in which they
“presence” or offer themselves to our grasp; and (c) the
way in which entities are gathered and organized into a
whole
The
mood
of the technological age is a mood of profound
boredom (for a critical review of this claim, see Beistegui 2003:
68ff). When we are attuned to entities by boredom, they matter to us
only to the degree that they relieve this boredom by offering us a
temporary
diversion.
Heidegger’s name for the basic ontological
characteristic
of entities (including us humans) in the
technological age is
Bestand
, often translated as
“resource” but perhaps best translated as
“stock”—as when we speak of the “stock”
of replaceable parts that are held in an inventory. When something is
“in stock”, it is on hand and available for selection.
Stock pieces are defined by their replaceability and mutual
substitutability (see GA79: 36–37).
Resources or stock pieces are gathered or organized, as a unified
whole
, in what Heidegger calls
das Gestell
(he
sometimes hyphenates it as:
Ge-Stell
). The root verb
stellen
means
to set in place
supply
, or
posit.
When Heidegger appropriates the word as an ontological
term, he explains that he takes the prefix
Ge-
as expressing
“the gathering, the unification, the bringing together of all
modes of supplying or positing” (GA15: 366 / FS 60). And
“the sense of positing is here that of that of a
challenging-forth”—i.e., that of compelling or forcing the
natural world to “yield” to the demands of the
technological order (GA15: 366 / FS 60). Perhaps unsurprisingly,
Gestell
’ has proven to be a difficult word to
translate. For many years, the default translation has been
“enframing”—capturing the idea that in the
technological age, entities are set within an exploitative framework.
More recently, Kisiel has argued that it should be translated as
“syn-thetic com-posit(ion)ing”, explaining that “the
Greek-rooted adjective ‘synthetic’ adds the note of
artifactuality and even artificiality to the synthesis of positions
and posits” (Kisiel 2021: 710). Wrathall has opted for
“inventory”, to capture the core notion that, in
technology, entities are “collected” and
“reconfigured” so that they can be “stored or placed
in such a manner that they are on call and available to be used,
combined, and reconfigured in whatever way we see fit” (Wrathall
2021g: 434). But the basic idea is that technology discovers what
entities are by compelling them to take a form that allows everything
to be gathered and ordered and set on call in a way that maximizes
their ready usability
In order to provide us with endless diversions, then, technological
calculation seeks out everything’s maximum uses (i.e., it
presents us with a maximal variety of different possible options) at
the minimum expense (where minimum expense means that choosing to do
one thing now does not constrain or restrict the range of options we
have in the future) (GA7: 19 / QCT 15).
According to Heidegger, Hegel and Nietzsche are each, in different
ways, the thinkers who articulate what is happening with being in the
technological age. Hegel’s “absolute reason in the
absolute metaphysics of subjectivity” is “essentially the
same thing” as modern technology (GA98: 58). This is because
Hegel’s project is “almost literally the attempt to
make
the world our own” (Pippin 2024: 68). With its
emphasis on a self-conscious remaking of the world, Hegel’s
thought obscures the need to foster a receptivity to things as having
weight, or mattering to us, independently of our immediate
projects.
It is in Nietzsche’s thought of the will to power and the
eternal recurrence of the same, however, that Heidegger thinks we can
most clearly discern the key ontological features of the technological
age. Heidegger interprets these doctrines as expressing an experience
in which everything we encounter
shows up as inviting us to rearrange it, reorder it, incorporate it
into new practices and relationships…. We find ourselves
constantly returned to a situation where we are free to rearrange and
reestablish our own interpretation of the world. (Wrathall 2011:
232)
5.2.2 The Danger of Technology
Heidegger regards the technological mode of revealing entities as
“the supreme danger” to humanity (GA7: 31 / QCT 26). There
is some variation in the scholarly accounts of how precisely to
understand technological mode of revealing and the danger that it
poses.
For Dreyfus, the essence of technology is found in the technological
preoccupation with flexibility and efficiency: “what our culture
is dedicated to and is good at”, Dreyfus argues, is
“flexibility and efficiency, not for the sake of some further
end, but just for the sake of flexibility and efficiency
themselves” (Dreyfus 2017: 184). But the imperative to maximize
flexibility and efficiency drives out things and practices that resist
efficient and flexible ordering—for instance, friendship, or
enjoying the sublime wonders of nature. Inefficient practices get
increasingly marginalized, or altered beyond recognition as they are
reinterpreted in a technological fashion. Friendship becomes
networking; “nature becomes one gigantic petrol station, a
source of energy for modern technology and industry” (GA16: 523
/ DT 50). As technology obliterates or reappropriates all marginal
practices, the danger is that it will block us from realizing our
essence as “
receivers
of understandings of being”
(Dreyfus 2017: 192)—after all, on Dreyfus’s account, these
marginal practices are the seedbed of the emergence of a new style of
being. Along similar lines, Haar argues that “
the
danger” is found in the way technology
threatens the relation of man to being…. Man has the vocation
of ‘watching over the essence of truth…. A human being
fully adapted to the technological world would no longer be human, for
being would no longer be for him worthy of questioning. (Haar 1987
[1993: 86–7])
Thomson puts “calculative thinking” at the core of his
account of the technological style. Calculative thinking
quantifies all qualitative relations, reducing entities to bivalent,
programmable ‘information’, digitized data ready to enter
into ‘a state of pure circulation’ on the internet.
(Thomson 2005: 56)
In denying that entities are defined by their qualitative differences,
the “progressive technologization of intelligibility”
effects “an ontologically reductive transformation of all
entities into intrinsically meaningless resources on standby for
optimization” (Thomson 2005: 75). Along similar lines, Pippin
emphasizes the “complex denial of … meaningfulness”
or significance that the technological understanding brings:
[b]eing as standing reserve, mere material for technological
manipulation or a kind of meaninglessness, has emerged
its
significance. (Pippin 2024: 49)
On Wrathall’s account, the technological style drives toward an
organization of the world that can serve any conceivable aim or
purpose at any given
moment.
This is experienced as a kind of liberation—we are free at any
moment to revisit our choices by pursuing an alternative goal or
ideal. No consequences are enduring, and prior decisions do not
constrain future action. In this way, technology discloses everything
as a mere
option
. An option is something that can, but need
not be, chosen. Choosing an option involves no enduring genuine
commitment to what is chosen. After the choice of one option, we are
free to revisit the choice later and substitute another option for the
one first selected. But the danger implicit in the optionalization of
everything is that everything is reduced to having merely instrumental
significance. Nothing shows up as having an importance that transcends
our current passing whims (see Wrathall 2019).
Heidegger’s account of technology has often been criticized for
being too abstract and theoretical, and thus detached from the
realities of actual technological systems. Feenberg charges that
Heidegger’s account is unrealistically essentialist in the sense
that it “holds that there is one and only one
‘essence’ of technology and it is responsible for the
chief problems of modern civilization” (Feenberg 1999: 3).
Heidegger’s essentialism, Belu and Feenberg also argue, inclines
Heidegger toward a “totalising” view that leads to
fatalism in the face of technology (Belu & Feenberg 2010).
For defenders of Heidegger’s account, the fatalism critique
exhibits a kind of dichotomous thinking about ontology that Heidegger
rejects. It assumes that either an understanding of being is something
in our power to change, or that we are absolutely powerless to even
recognize it, let alone escape it. While Heidegger does hold that it
is not within our power directly to change the prevailing
understanding of being, this does not mean we are powerless in the
face of technology. Commentators like Dreyfus, Thomson, and Wrathall
argue that, as we change our background practices, the possibilities
open to us will shift
accordingly.
Much of Heidegger’s later thought is “preparatory”
in the sense of attempting to prepare the ground for to foster
practices that will disclose a new understanding of being.
Metaphysics, Heidegger insists, reaches its final and consummate form
in the technological
age.
There will be no new, all-encompassing ontological styles. The reason
for thinking that the technological age is the final metaphysical
epoch seems to lie in technology’s ability to incorporate and
“enhance” any practice. In other words, there is no
emerging practice that can lead us beyond a technological ordering,
because any good we might decide to pursue can be set up, commodified,
and offered as an option made available through
technology.
The only path out of technology requires us first to be reattuned in
such a way that we do not will for ourselves the unlimited freedom of
aimless consumption.
5.3 Beyond Metaphysics
Much of Heidegger’s later work is concerned with envisioning
pathways toward overcoming metaphysics. What these paths have in
common is their recognition of “the need for a more
‘receptive’ stance towards being” (J. Richardson
2012: 212). In particular, they are designed to reawaken
the experience of something sacred—of something capable of
making demands on us, of calling us to act for ends higher than the
satisfaction of our passing whims. (Wrathall & Lambeth 2011:
173)
Thus, Heidegger’s hope for an “other” beginning is
the hope for a new ethos—a non-metaphysical form of life that
involves taking part in the disclosure of a particular style of life
that is shaped by one’s locale. Already in
Being and
Time
, Heidegger had emphasized that human beings are essentially
being-in-the-world, and that means that we only are who we are because
we are involved with our world. In his later work, this thought
develops into the claim that, as Malpas puts it, human being is
“intimately tied to place” (Malpas 2012: 67). “To be
a human being” Heidegger explains in his later work,
“means to dwell” (GA7: 149 / PLT 145) And to dwell
well
is to dwell “poetically”. Poetic dwelling
recognizes that, as Young explains,
our world is not a human achievement but is rather
“gifted” to us in the “adaptation”
Ereignis
) of beyng….In a state of spiritual health,
we experience a deep and festive “gratitude” (
das
Danken;
GA52: 197)) for the “favor” (
die
Gunst
) that has been bestowed on us (GA9: 310/326), for
“the wonder that around us a world worlds, that there is
something rather than nothing, that there are things and we ourselves
are in their midst (GA52:64)”. (Young 2021: 257)
In addition, poetic dwelling involves participation in conserving
Schonen
) the place wherein we are at
home.
Drawing on his reading of Hölderlin, Heidegger identifies four
dimensions of the local place that sustains human poetic
dwelling.
He refers to these four dimensions collectively as “the
fourfold”. They include the
earth
, the
sky
mortals
, and the
divinities
The local character of the locale is a function of the particular
character of the earth, sky, mortal practices, and divinities in that
place. As Rorty explains, the fourfold
offer[s] a relationalist, contextualist account of things. In this
account, things are what they are by virtue of their relation to
everything else. This means that they have different features
depending on the context in which they are put. (Rorty 2005: 274)
Heidegger’s relationalist account of the fourfold, Rorty
concludes, offers
an attractive alternative to the substantialism that we inherit from
Aristotle—the doctrine that relations to other objects are mere
accidents, which leave unchanged the essence of the self-contained,
autonomous object. (Rorty 2005: 274; compare Mitchell 2015: 3)
For a more detailed account of Heidegger’s “other
beginning”, see
supplement: Heidegger and the Other Beginning
Copyright © 2025
Mark Wrathall
mark
wrathall
philosophy