First published Tue Sep 16, 2003; substantive revision Wed Feb 1, 2023

eudaemonistic conception of ethics. That is to say, happiness or

it. If Plato's conception of happiness is elusive and his

support for a morality of happiness seems somewhat subdued, there are

several reasons. First, he nowhere defines the concept of happiness

nor makes it the direct target of investigation but introduces it in

an oblique way in the pursuit of other questions. Second, the

treatment of the human good varies in the different dialogues, so that

readers find themselves confronted with the problem of what to make of

unitarians regard the dialogues as pieces of one mosaic and take the

view that Plato, in essence, maintains a unified doctrine from his

lost its impact in recent years, developmentalism has gained in

deny that the character of Plato's early, middle, and late works

differs in style, language, scope, and content, as is to be expected

in a philosopher who was at work for more than fifty years. Most

developmentalists, in turn, agree that it is impossible to line up

Plato's works like pearls on a string and to reconstruct his

progress from dialogue to dialogue; where the views expressed in

different dialogues seem to disagree, there may be complementation or

never speaks in his own voice, it is important to take note of who the

interlocutors are and what role is assigned to Socrates, if he is the

isolation when it comes to the reconstruction of his doctrine; but

even the comparison and contrasting of ideas presented in different

dialogues is not a safe recipe for interpreting this elusive

thinker's views (for a more detailed discussion see the entry on

characteristics as a group. They are short interrogations by Socrates

of the kind indicated in his explanation of his divine mission in the

positive accounts. The positive accounts contained in the middle, the

as a state of perfection in a moral as well as in an intellectual

sense. The exact nature of this state of mind is not easy to pinpoint,

however, because it is based on metaphysical presuppositions that are,

at least prima facie, both hazy and out of the realm of ordinary

understanding. There is not, as there is in Aristotle, an explicit

potential in a well-organized community. Instead, at least in some

self-abnegating: The soul is to remain aloof from the pleasures of the

body in the pursuit of higher knowledge, while communal life demands

the subordination of individual wishes and aims to the common

compounded by the fact that the metaphysical underpinnings seem to

change during his long life. In the Socratic dialogues, there are no

indications that the search for virtue and the human good goes beyond

the human realm. This changes in the middle dialogues that show a

knowledge, a development that leads to the positing of the

'Forms' as the determinants of the true nature of all

things, culminating in the Form of the Good as the transcendent

principle of all goodness. Though the theory of the Forms is not

confined to human values but encompasses the whole of nature, Plato, in

the middle dialogues, seems to assume no more than an analogy between

human affairs and cosmic harmony. The late dialogues, by contrast,

display an increasing tendency to assume a unity of the microcosm of

human life and the macrocosmic order of the entire universe, a

mathematical proportions, the metaphysical status of the Forms is even

harder to make out in the late dialogues than in the middle dialogues.

Though Plato's late works do not show any willingness to lower

the standards of knowledge as such, Plato indicates that his design of

a rational cosmic order is based on conjecture and speculation, an

treatment of ethical standards and political institutions in his last

If ethics is widely regarded as the most accessible branch of

philosophy, it is so because many of its presuppositions are,

example, serve some end or purpose; whether they are right or wrong

depends on the agent's overall aims. At least for secularists,

the attainment of these overall aims is regarded as a major condition

of the good life. What we regard as a life worth living also depends

on the notion we have of our own nature and of the conditions of its

fulfillment. This, in turn, is determined, at least in part, by the

values and standards of the society we live in. Personal ends and

purposes depend in each case not only on reason, but also on the

these ends can also depend at least in part on external factors, such

as health, material prosperity, social status, and even on good looks

Although these presuppositions may seem self-evident, most of the time,

human beings are aware of them only implicitly because they lead

that are, under normal circumstances, not objects of reflection. It is

only in times of crisis that a society's traditions and precepts

are challenged by someone like Socrates, who sees the need to disturb

course, not the first to question the Greek way of life. Presocratic

critics of their times, and the sophists had argued provocatively

that, contrary to the naïve view, it is custom and convention,

rather than nature that set the standards for what is deemed right or

wrong, good or bad, in every society. But if other thinkers preceded

Socrates with moral and social criticism, he was certainly the first

to challenge his fellows on an individual basis on the ground that

38a). Whatever position one may take in the controversy concerning the

degree to which Plato's early dialogues are true to the

) provoked the kind of enmity against him that led

to his conviction and execution. In the eyes of conservative

values of their society. As Socrates saw it, the 'virtues'

- which is to say the social skills, attitudes, and

wealth, power, and capacities for self-indulgence, to the detriment of

public morality and the community's well-being (see the entry on

The Socratic legacy prompted Plato to engage in a thorough examination

of the nature of knowledge and reality, an examination that gradually

took him far beyond the scope of the historical Socrates'

partners. And Plato preserved the dialogical form even in those of his

late works where Socrates is replaced by a stand-in and where the

didactic nature of the presentations is hard to reconcile with the

pretense of live discussion. But these didactic discourses continue to

considerations. And it can be hard to assess the extent to which Plato

agrees with the pronouncements of his speakers, whether that speaker

is Socrates or anyone else. Furthermore, the fact that a certain

ethical problem or its solution is not mentioned in a certain dialogue

does not mean that Plato was unaware of it. There is, therefore, no

certainty concerning the question: "What did Plato see and when

did he first see it?" The lack of information about the order in

which Plato wrote his works adds to this difficulty. It stands to

reason, however, that he started with the short dialogues that

moderation, piety. It also stands to reason that Plato gradually

widened the scope of his investigations by reflecting not only on the

social and political conditions of morality but also on the logical,

moral theory. These theoretical reflections often take on a life of

Plato never lost interest in the question of the conditions of the

question of the good life and its conditions in general but rather

of, or claim to be experts on, that virtue. Socrates'

justification for this procedure is that a paragon or expert must know

therefore, be able to give an account or definition of it (cf. Xenophon

with two renowned generals in the Peloponnesian war, Laches and

with two of the later Thirty Tyrants, namely with the then very young

Charmides, an alleged model of modesty, and his guardian and

raises the question of the nature of the beautiful with a producer of

of virtue in a discussion with Protagoras, the most famous teacher of

relation to virtue with the most prominent teacher of rhetoric among

as such is acquired is raised by Meno, a disciple of Gorgias and an

ambitious seeker of power, wealth, and fame, who later met a gruesome

death in Persia in the pursuit of those very values.

about their own competence in the discussion. And such confidence

is not unreasonable. If virtue is a kind of 'skill' or a special

and be able to give an account of that skill or proficiency. As

professed by Socrates' partners is revealed to be, at best, an

implicit familiarity. When they are confronted with their inability to

explain the nature of their cherished virtue or expertise, they end up

cruel-looking games is not just to undermine the false confidence of

his interlocutors but also to pave the way towards general

definitions and standards concerning the virtues. There were no widely

exposing the flaws in his partners' abortive arguments in his

of such standards. The respective flaws vary greatly in kind and

sufficient to capture the nature or essence of the virtue in question.

Definitions that consist in the replacement of the concept in question

with a synonym are open to the same objections as the original

definition. Definitions may be hopelessly vague or miss the mark

entirely, which is to say that they may be either too wide and include

unwanted characteristics or subsets, or too narrow so that they

incomplete because the object in question does not constitute a

excellences' are not simple conditions, they may be subject to

nature of the underlying deficiencies with more or less diagnostic

Given that the focus in the early dialogues is almost entirely on the

had some cards up his sleeve that he chose not to play for the time

being. This would presuppose that Plato had not only a clear notion of

the nature of the different virtues but also a definitive conception

of the good life as such. Since Plato was neither a moral nihilist nor

, as a way of life for everyone. Perplexity, as

eventually coalesce into a coherent account of the good life, then he

keeps this expectation to himself. Nor would such optimism seem

guarantee that only false convictions are refuted in a Socratic

suggestions are often as mercilessly discarded as their less promising

straighten out what is skewed in Socratic refutations, as well as to

detect unfair moves and to supplement what is missing. It is, in

fact, often not difficult to make out problematic or fallacious moves

in Socrates' argument and to correct them, but such corrections

Plato's overall conception of the good life and its moral

presuppositions at that point in time. It is, therefore, a matter of

conjecture whether Plato himself held any positive views while he

composed one aporetic dialogue after the other. He may have regarded

his investigations as experimental stages or have seen each dialogue

as an element in a network of approaches that he hoped to integrate

If there is a general lesson to be drawn from the many failed accounts

is that isolated definitions of single virtues, summed up in one

sentence, will not do. The evidence that Plato wanted his readers to

draw this very conclusion already in his early dialogues is somewhat

contradictory, however. He famously pleads for the unity of the

all to knowledge. Scholars are, therefore, wont to speak of the

passions has, from Aristotle on, been treated as a denial of

intellectualizing tendency does not tell us, however, what kind of

virtues, nor what its content should be. Moreover, the emphasis on

knowledge does not rule out an awareness on Plato's part of the

importance of other factors, even in his early dialogues. Though Plato

often compares the virtues with technical skills, such as those of a

doctor or a pilot, he may have realized that virtues also involve

emotional attitudes, desires, and preferences but not yet have seen a

clear way to coordinate or combine the rational and the affective

courage, invoking two different elements. In his attempt to define

two generals and 'experts' on courage, is faced with the

dilemma that steadfastness seems not to be a satisfactory definition

of courage either in itself or in combination with knowledge

. 192a - 194c). His comrade Nicias, on the other hand,

fails when he tries to identify courage exclusively as a certain type

of knowledge (197e - 200a). The investigation of moderation in the

158e - 160d) and self-knowledge on the other (166e - 175a). It

is clear that a complex account would be needed to combine these two

evaluative and emotional attitudes towards the ends to be attained and

towards the means to be employed. Such an insight is at least

better for the soul of its possessor than the unjust life, an argument

that he fortifies with a mythical depiction of the soul's reward

and punishment after death (523a - 527e). But the nature of

justice, and what is required for the proper care of one's soul,

tendencies. In his earlier dialogues, Plato may or may not already be

envisaging the kind of solution that he is going to present in the

as their basis. Courage, moderation, and justice presuppose a certain

steadfastness of character as well as a harmony of purpose between the

disparate parts of the soul, but their goodness depends entirely on

the intellectual part of the soul, just as the virtue of the citizens

in the just state depends on the wisdom of the philosopher kings

virtues of character is thus acknowledged, but they are relegated to

There are at least some indications that Plato already saw the need

for a holistic conception of the good life when he composed his

he lets Nicias founder in his attempt to define courage as the

'knowledge of what is to be feared and what should inspire

. 199c - e). In a different but related way, Socrates

alludes to a comprehensive knowledge at the end of the

urges that this type of knowledge is insufficient for the happy life

Pointing out what is wrong or missing in particular arguments is a far

cry from a philosophical conception of the ultimate good in human

life. But the fact that Plato insists on the shortcomings of a purely

least facing up to these problems. The discussion of the 'unity

- confirms that Plato realized that a critique of the

justify such a unitary point of view. Nevertheless, the evidence that

Plato already had a unified conception of the good life in mind when

It may be helpful to begin with a consideration of the method of

ethical inquiry that Socrates is portrayed as using in the early

dialogues. A reflection on the meaning of Socrates' quest for

definitions in the early dialogues suggests that Plato cannot have

been blind to the sterility of a purely negative way of argument, or

if he was blind at first, his blindness cannot have lasted long, for

First and foremost, definitions presuppose that there is a definable

object; that is to say, it must have a stable nature. Nothing can be

defined that is of a variable nature. In addition, the object in

question must be a unitary phenomenon, even if its unity may be

complex. If definitions are to provide the basis of knowledge, they

require some kind of essentialism. This presupposition is indeed made

time, the terminology that will be characteristic of his full-fledged

various examples of pious behavior, Socrates demands an account of

common to all cases of what is holy or pious. Despite this pregnant

already presupposes transcendent Forms, in a realm of their own

they were also often used in the more abstract sense of

'kind'. No more than piety or holiness in the abstract

sense seems to be presupposed in the discussion of the

. There is, at any rate, no mention of any

separation of a sensible and an intelligible realm, let alone of an

or pious makes intelligible, however, the reason why Plato felt

ontological status and on the appropriate means of access to them.

Given that they are the objects of definition and the models of their

ordinary representatives, there is every reason not only to treat them

as real but also to assign to them a higher kind of unity and

perfection. And once this step has been taken, it is only natural to

entities is not to be expected through ordinary experience but

presupposes some special kind of intellectual insight. It seems, then,

that once Plato had accepted invariant and unitary objects of thought

as the subject of definition, he was predestined to follow the path

that led him to adopt a metaphysics and epistemology of transcendent

Forms. The very fact that mathematics was already an established

the same standards in moral philosophy. It led him to search for

models of morality beyond the limits of everyday experience. This, in

turn, explains the development of his theory of recollection and the

postulate of Forms as transcendent, immaterial objects as the basis of

both reality and thought that he refers to in the

We do not know when, precisely, Plato adopted this mode of thought,

but it stands to reason that his contact with the Pythagorean school

on his first voyage to Southern Italy and Sicily around 390 BC played

a major role in that development. Mathematics as a model-science has

precise definitions. It also makes plausible the claim that the

essence of these entities cannot be comprehended in isolation but only

in a network of interconnections that have to be worked out at the

same time as each particular entity is defined. Thus, to understand

what it is to be a triangle, it is necessary -

- to have a clear notion of the nature of points,

lines, planes, and their interrelations. That Plato was aware of that

fact is indicated in his introduction of the theory of recollection in

, 81d: "As the whole of nature is akin, and the

soul has learned everything, nothing prevents a man, after recalling

one thing only - a process men call learning - discovering

everything else for himself, if he is brave and does not tire of the

search; for searching and learning, are, as a whole, recollection

The slave manages, with some pushing and pulling by Socrates, and

thanks to some illustrations drawn in the sand, to double the area of

a given square. In the course of this interrogation, the disciple

(97b - 98b). As he argues, true beliefs are unreliable because

they behave like 'the statues of Daedalus that easily run away

as long as they are not tied down'. The requisite 'tying

down' happens (98a) "by giving an account of the reason

why. And that, Meno my friend, is recollection, as we previously

agreed. After they are tied down, in the first place, they become

indicates that, according to Plato, knowledge does not consist in a

The complexity underlying Plato's theory of the Forms as it

discussion initially suggests that recollection is no more than the

grasping of concepts. Thus, the concept of 'exact equality in

size' is prompted by the perception of more or less

equal-seeming sticks and stones (74a - e). The same condition

applies to the other examples of Forms, 65d - e: "Do we say

that there is such a thing as the Just itself or not? And the

Beautiful, and the Good? [...] I am speaking of all things such

as Tallness, Health, Strength, and in a word, the reality of all other

things, that which each of them essentially is." But Plato does

not employ his newly established metaphysical entities as the basis

for working out a definitive conception of the human soul and the

himself to warnings against the contamination of the soul by the

senses and their pleasures, and quite generally against corruption by

worldly values. He gives no advice concerning human conduct beyond

temptations. This seems a rather austere picture of human life, and an

egocentric one, to boot, for nothing is said about relations between

should likewise take care of their souls as best they can. It is

unclear whether this otherworldly and ascetic attitude is the sign of

a particularly pessimistic period in Plato's life or whether it

Socrates' impending death. But as long as this negative or

prevails, no interest is to be expected on the part of Plato in nature

as a whole - let alone in the principles of the cosmic order

(but cf. 5.1 below). But it is not only the apparent asceticism that

stands in the way of a wider perspective. Socrates himself seems to

have been quite indifferent to the study of nature. While in the

student of all things in the sky and below the earth" are quite

unfounded (18c); he has never conversed on such issues at all, and the

attribution to him of the Anaxagorean tenet that the sun is a stone

and the moon consists of earth is a sign of his accusers'

Socrates explains his preference for the city and his avoidance of

nature (230d): "Landscapes and trees have nothing to teach me

- only the people in the city can do that." That Plato is

not distorting the facts here is confirmed by the testimony of

the study of heavenly phenomena and his concentration on human affairs

I 1.15 - 16). If Plato later takes a much

more positive attitude towards nature in general, this is a

deliberately confines his account of the nature of heaven and earth,

with its heavenly order and hellish geography, to the myth about the

soul's afterlife (108d - 114c). As he states in conclusion,

this mythical depiction is not to be taken literally but as an

encouragement to heed its moral message and to take care of

one's soul (114d - e). This is as constructive as Plato gets

If Plato went through a period of open-ended experimentation and

tentative suggestions, this stage was definitely over by the time he

account will be provided here in order to explain the ethical

principles set forth in that work, for these principles are closely

metaphysical conceptions. That the work represents a major change in

the constructive discussion that ensues in its remaining nine books.

who defend, with increasing vigor and contentiousness, their notion of

the altercation with the sophist Thrasymachus has received the most

justice is the right of the stronger and that conventional justice is,

Socrates at the various turns of the discussion will not be presented

here. Though they reduce Thrasymachus to angry silence, they are not

concerned, the result is that I know nothing, for when I don't

know what justice is, I'll hardly know whether it is a kind of

virtue or not, or whether a person who has it is happy or

is not the end of the discussion. At the beginning of

the next book, two members of the audience, Plato's brothers

defended his case badly, but if Socrates wants to convince his

audience, he must do better than that. The brothers demand a positive

account both of what justice is and of what it does to the soul of its

The change of character in the subsequent discussion is remarkable.

get ample time to elaborate on their objections (357a - 367e).

Though they profess not to be convinced that injustice is better than

justice, they argue that, in the present state of society, injustice

pays - with the gods as well as with humans - as long as

the semblance of respectability is preserved. To prove this claim, the

of their society's attitude towards justice. As the story of the

Ring of Gyges and its gift of invisibility proves, everyone who does

not have a god-like character will eventually succumb to such a

ring's temptations (359c - 360d). Instead of the wolf of

Thrasymachus' account, it is the wily fox who is the paragon of

injustice (365a-d). He will succeed at every level because he knows

how to play the power-game with cunning. The just man, by contrast,

pays no heed to the mere semblance of goodness but rather to its

substance and, therefore, must suffer a Christ-like fate because he

does not comply with the demands of favoritism and blandishment

(361e). Even the gods, as the poets confirm, are on the side of the

successful scoundrel since they can be propitiated by honors and

effect each of them has on the souls of their possessors. As this

critique indicates, Plato, at this point, clearly regards refutation as

an insufficient way of making true converts. Whether he ever had such

confidence in the power of refutation must remain a moot point. But

in Plato's later dialogues, it is never again used in the

knock-down fashion of the early dialogues. But in his treatment of

justice, Plato does not directly resort to the theory of Forms.

Instead, he develops a political and psychological model as a solution

to the problem of the nature of justice. That there is also a

metaphysical way to determine the nature of justice is indicated only

way' that would also have been possible for him to take (435d;

A brief sketch of Plato's inquiry into the nature of justice

must suffice here to make intelligible his distinction of justice

from the other kinds of virtue and of their role in the good life (for

a quite circuitous way. Justice is first to be studied in the

study of how a city comes to be will supposedly reveal the origin of

justice and injustice (369a). Its founding principle is - at

least at first - no high-minded concern of humankind, but mutual

: "A city comes to be because none of us

things. ... And because people need many things, and because one

person calls on a second out of one need (

third out of a different need, many people gather in a single place to

is, at least at this point, purely economic. The minimal city is based

on the need for food, clothing, shelter, and for the requisite tools.

It is economic efficiency that dictates the adoption of the principle

of the 'division of functions': It is best if everyone

performs the task s/he is naturally most fit for. This principle

state of farmers and craftsmen but also the subsequent division of

state' that caters to higher demands, for a more luxurious city

needs protection by a professional army as well as the leadership of a

class of philosopher-kings and -queens. Beyond the claim that the

division of functions is more economical, Plato gives no justification

for this fateful decision that determines the social order in the

state, as well as the nature of the virtues. Human beings are not born

alike but with different abilities that predestine them for different

tasks in a well-ordered state. This leads to Plato's principle:

Because the division of functions paves the way for the definition of

justice as 'doing your own thing and not meddling with that of

others' in Book IV (432d - 433b), it is necessary to briefly

review the kind of social order Plato has in mind, the psychological

principles he assumes, and the political institutions by which that

order is to be secured, for this explains not only the establishment

of a three-class society and the explanation of the corresponding

structure of the soul but also Plato's theory of education and

the metaphysical underpinnings. That economic needs are the basis of

the political structure does not, of course, mean that they are the

only human needs Plato recognizes. It indicates, however, that the

emphasis here is on the unity and self-sufficiency of a

(423c - e; 425c). This focus should be kept in mind when assessing

The need for a professionally trained army leads to the discussion of

peace and external security presupposes the combination of two quite

education are very detailed because it must combine the right kind of

temperament and attitude in the soldiers (376d - 403d). The

organisation and supervision of education is the special task of the

third class, that of the rulers of the city (412b - 417b). They

are to be selected through tests of both intelligence and character

from among the soldiers - individuals who are unshakable in

their conviction that their own well-being is intimately tied to that

of the city. To ensure that members of the military and the ruling

class retain the proper attitude towards their civic duties, members

of both classes must lead a communal life without private homes,

such a life is not apt to make these citizens happy, the topic of

happiness is addressed for the first time, but Socrates quickly

brushes it aside at this point on the ground that the political order

is designed to make the entire city happy, rather than any one

The division of functions that leads to the separation of the three

classes for the purpose of achieving the social conditions for justice

concludes the discussion of the social order (427d - 434c). The

peculiar manner in which Socrates further develops his explanation of

the nature of justice can best be understood with reference to the

upshot of this discussion. The catalogue of what in later tradition

be left to tradition and to the oracle of Apollo at Delphi on the

(427b - c). The definition of justice is to be discovered

by a process of elimination. If there are four virtues in the city,

then justice must be the one that is left over after the other three

have been identified. There is no proof offered that there are

exactly four virtues in a state, nor that they are items that can be

lifted up, singly, for inspection, like objects from a basket.

Instead, Socrates points out the role they play in the maintenance of

intellectual virtue and the exclusive possession of the rulers - little

more is said at this point than that it is 'good council'

wool: Through thick and thin, the guardians must be dyed-in-the-wool

adherents to the laws' decrees about what is to be feared and

either, but rather a combination of belief with a certain disposition

all classes about who should rule - a conviction based on a

class, then, has no specific virtue of its own. Finally, the

identification of justice is due to the sudden insight on

Socrates' part that justice is the principle that has been at

work all along in the founding of the model state - namely, that

everyone is to "do their own thing and not meddle with that of

The promise to establish the isomorphic structure of the city and soul

has not been forgotten. After the definition and assignment of the

four virtues to the three classes of the city, the investigation turns

to the role and function of the soul's virtues. The soul is held

to consist of three parts corresponding to the three classes in the

city. The lengthy argument for the tri-partition of the soul into a

can here be neither reproduced nor subjected to a critical evaluation.

of his own procedure, despite his unusually circumspect way of

he regards it as an important innovation. Indeed, there is no

indication of separate parts of the soul in any of the earlier

itself becomes the source of the appetites and desires. The difference

between the rational and the appetitive part is easily justified

because the opposition between the decrees of reason and the various

kinds of unreasonable desires is familiar to everyone. The existence

different from both reason and appetite - is harder to prove.

But the phenomenon of moral indignation is treated as evidence for a

psychic force that is reducible neither to reason nor to any of the

appetites; it is rather an ally of reason in a well-ordered soul, a

force opposed to the unruly appetites. This concludes the proof that

there are three parts in the soul, corresponding to the three classes

in the city - namely, the rational part representing the wisdom

of the rulers, the spirited part, manifest in the courage of the

soldiers, and the appetitive part that motivates the rest of the

The discussion of the division of the soul sets the stage for the

(441c-445e): There will be justice in the city if the members of all

three classes mind their own business; similarly, in the individual

soul, there will be justice if each part of the soul fulfills its

upper parts have been given the right kind of training and education

in order to control the appetitive part. The three other virtues are

then assigned to the respective parts of the soul. Courage is the

excellence of the spirited part, wisdom belongs to the rational part,

and moderation is the consent of all three parts about who should rule

and who should obey. Justice turns out to be the overall unifying

quality of the soul, for the just person not only refrains from

meddling with what is not his externally but also harmonizes the

three parts of the soul internally. While justice is order and

harmony, injustice is its opposite: It is a rebellion of one part of

the city or soul against the others, and it results in the

inappropriate rule of their inferior parts. Justice and injustice in

the soul are, then, analogous to health and illness in the body. This

comparison suffices to bring the investigation to its desired result:

If justice is health and harmony of the soul, then injustice must be

disease and disorder. Hence, it is clear that justice is a good state

of the soul that makes its possessor happy, and injustice is its

opposite. As no one in his right mind would prefer to live with a

ruined body, similarly no one would prefer to live with a diseased soul. In

promised goal already at the end of Book IV. Socrates has met

is a good, in and by itself, for the soul of its possessor, and

occupies six more books is due most of all to several loose ends that

need to be tied up. Apart from the fact that reason and order are to

reign supreme, little has been said about the citizens' way of

life. This gap will be filled, at least in part, by the description of

the communal life of the upper classes without private property and

family in Book V. More importantly, nothing has been said about the

rulers and their particular kind of knowledge. This is a crucial point

virtues show, their quality is contingent on the rulers' wisdom.

(473c - d): "Until philosophers rule as kings or those who

are now called kings and leaders genuinely and adequately philosophize

... cities will have no rest from evils, nor will the human

which will continue through Books VI and VII. Because they also

conception of the good soul and the good state, for the 'Form of

the Good' turns out to be the ultimate source of all being and

knowledge. A short summary of the upshot of the educational program

must suffice here. The future philosophers, both women and men, are

selected from the group of guardians whose general cultural training

they share. If they combine moral firmness with quickness of mind,

they are subject to a rigorous curriculum of higher learning that will

prepare them for the ascent from the world of the senses to the world

of intelligence and truth, an ascent whose stages are summed up in the

similes of the Sun, the Line, and the Cave (508a - 518b). To

achieve this ascent, the students have to undergo, first, a

science that supposedly enables its possessor to deal in a systematic

way with the objects of real knowledge - the Forms in general

- and with the Form of the Good in particular - the

principle of the goodness of all else (531c - 535a). This study is

to last for another five years. Successful candidates are then sent

back into the Cave as administrators of ordinary political life for 15

years. At the age of fifty, the rulers are granted leave to pursue

philosophy, but even that pursuit is interrupted by periods of service

as overseers over the order of the state. This completes, in a

Plato's design of an autocratic rule by an aristocracy of the

mind has received a lot of flak. But our assessment of his politics

must here be limited to an assessment of the kind of happiness it supposedly

provides. Regardless of whether or not we find plausible Plato's

assumption of an overall principle of the good as the basis of the

political order, his model state has, at least in theory, the

advantage that it guarantees both internal and external peace. That is

no mean feat in a society where interstate and civil wars were a

constant threat and often enough ended in the destruction of the

entire city. In addition, the division of functions guarantees a high

degree of efficiency if every citizen does what he/she is naturally

suited to do. But what about the citizens' needs beyond those

for security and material goods? Are they to find their life's

fulfillment only in the pursuit of their jobs? Plato seems to think

so when he characterizes each class by its specific kind of desire

and its respective good (581c): The philosophers are lovers of wisdom

try to find, satisfaction in the kinds of goods they cherish is a

point that is further pursued in the depiction of the decay of the

city and its ruling citizens, from the best (the aristocracy of

the mind) down to the worst (the tyranny of lust) in

Books VIII and IX. A discussion of the tenability of this explanation

of political and psychological decadence will not be attempted here.

It is supposed to show that all inferior forms of government of city

and soul are doomed to fail because of the inherent tensions between

Some brief comments on Plato's conception of happiness are in

order at this point. He clearly goes on the assumption that human

beings are happy insofar as they achieve the goals they cherish.

Though this notion seems to come close to the 'preference

satisfaction' for all citizens that is nowadays regarded as the

primary aim of every liberal state, Plato's restriction of each

obviously in the case of the citizens of the third class who

Plato's own moral psychology, in that all human souls consist of

three parts - a rational, a spirited, and an appetitive part

- whose health and harmony constitute the soul's and the

comparison of the people to a strong beast that must be placated

(493a - c)? This comparison is echoed later in the comparison of

the soul to a multiform beast, where reason just barely controls the

hydra-like heads of the appetites and manages to do so only thanks to

the aid of a lion-like spirit (588c - 590d). Is Plato thereby

rabble, as has often been claimed? He can at least be cleared of the

suspicion that the workers are mere serfs of the upper classes

because he explicitly grants them the free enjoyment of all the

customary goods that he denies to the upper classes (419a):

"Others own land, build fine big houses, acquire furnishings to

go along with them, make their own private sacrifices to the gods,

entertain guests, and also, of course, possess what you were talking

about just now, gold and silver and all the things that are thought to

sex. But apart from the granting of material largesse, the members of

the third class are quite neglected in Plato's ideal city.

Apparently, no education is provided for them, for there is no

athletic training, and there is no mention that obedience to the

rulers' commands is not the only source of happiness for the

third class. Plato seems to sidestep his own insight that all human

beings have an immortal soul and have to take care of it as best they

confirm in a fanciful way in the Myth of Er at the end of

The lifestyle designated for the upper classes also seems open to

the laws for the sake of preserving the city's inner and outer

peace, and in the deeds of valor in war. Theirs is an austere

camp-life; not all of them will be selected for higher education. But

even the philosophers' lives leave a lot to be desired, and not

only because they have to starve their common human appetites and

altogether enviable, as a closer inspection would show. Not only do

the philosophers have two jobs - in violation of the rule

'one person - one function' - in that they are

They are also not to enjoy open-ended research but are, rather, subject

to a mental training that is explicitly designed to turn their minds

away from the enjoyment of all worldly beauty in order to focus

exclusively on the contemplation of the Forms. This is indicated by

(529a - 531d): The students are not to crane their necks to watch

the beauty of the "embroidery in the heavens" but rather

to concern themselves with the ideal motions of ideal moving bodies

in a purely geometrical fashion, and they are not to listen to audible

sounds, but to attend to the mathematics of harmonics. The universe is

not treated as an admirable cosmos - with the explicit purpose of

providing moral and intellectual support to the citizens - in the way

claim that their lives are 729 times more pleasant than the

tyrants' (IX 587e) seems like a gross exaggeration, even if they

enjoy the pleasures of being filled with pure and unadulterated truths

while everyone else enjoys only semblances of the really real

respects, Plato's ideal city must seem to us far from ideal. The

economic niche and function, but its machine-like character must seem

repellent to us, given that no deviations are permitted from the

prescribed pattern. If innovations are forbidden, no room is left for

the fulfillment of a person's function is sufficient to secure

her happiness, or at least that is suggested by the

(352d - 354a). It states that every object, animal, and person has

function well, it does well: For a living thing, 'doing

refutation of Thrasymachus is found wanting as a proof of

revoked. On the contrary, it is affirmed by the principle of

'one person - one job' that is the very basis of

in the case of the citizens of the third class, given that they are

not permitted to engage in politics, even if it may be economically

most efficient. These features suffice to make the ideal life in

Plato's city unattractive to us, not to speak of certain other

features that have not been explored here, such as the communal life

envisaged for the upper classes and the assignment of sexual

partnerships by a lottery that is rigged for the purposes of eugenics.

But the feature that must strike us as strangest about Plato's

depiction of his citizens' lives is that he does not acknowledge

factor that could throw a more favorable light on the

life of the third class, the life of tailors, carpenters, doctors,

architects, sailors, i.e., that they will take pride and joy in their

own work and in what they produce, given that they each in their own

without which the city could not function. Plato does not seem to

this critique must seem, it should be pointed out that Plato is

clearly not concerned with the conditions that would make his city

attractive to all citizens. His aim is rather more limited: He wants

The same explanation applies to his depiction of the city's and

its citizens' decay in Books VIII and IX. Contrary to certain

critics' assumptions, Plato is not there trying to predict and

explain the course of history. Rather, he wants to explain the

generation and decay typical of each political system and the

psychopathology of its leaders. Plato finds the basis of both in the

specific values - be they honor, money, freedom, or lust -

that are embedded in the constitutions of the different types of

state. It is unlikely that Plato presupposes that there are, in reality,

pure representatives of these types, though some historical states may

have been better representatives of those types than others. But the

question remains whether he had a notion of the fact that his

the claim of individuals to have their own aims and ends and not to

be treated like automata, with no thoughts and wishes of their own.

mitigate this bleak picture, for the sake of balancing this picture, it

is more fruitful to look at other works of Plato's middle period

, for though each dialogue should be studied as a

unity of its own, it is also necessary to treat the different

that focus on the individual soul and pay no attention to communal

because it mentions neither the immortality nor the tripartition of

the soul. But its dramatic staging - the praise of Eros by a

company of symposiasts - is not germane to the otherworldly and

addition, Plato has good reasons for leaving aside a discussion of the

that love is an incentive, not only for all humans but

for all other living beings as well. Contrary to all previous

speakers, Socrates denies that Eros is a god because the gods are in

a state of perfection. Love, by contrast, is a desire by needy

speakers' confusion of love itself with the beloved object. This

important insight is presented not as Socrates' own but as the

upshot of a 'lecture on the nature of love by the wise priestess

Diotima' (201d - 212b): Eros is a powerful demon, a being

) what is mortal and what is immortal, an ever

needy hunter of the beautiful. Human beings share that demonic

condition, for they are neither good nor bad but desire the good and

the beautiful, the possession of which would constitute happiness for

them. Because all people want happiness, they pursue the good as well

as they can (205a - 206b). In each case, they desire the particular

kinds of objects that they hope will fulfill their needs. Such

fulfillment is not a passive possession; it is, rather, the

appropriation of the objects of love that are deemed to be essential

same as with us, and mortal nature seeks so far as possible to live

forever and be immortal. And this is possible in one way only: by

reproduction, because it leaves behind a new young one in place of the

old." There is, then, a constant need for self-restoration and

.). This need is explained by Diotima with an impressive

depiction of the constant flux that all organisms undergo, which, in the

case of human beings, not only affects their physical constitution but

replenishment, none of them even stays the same over time

In the case of human beings, these needs express themselves in

result in, or even be fulfilled by, the production of biological

works of art), or even by the creation of order in the city that is

then guided by the virtues of justice and moderation (209a - e).

Diotima's lecture is finally crowned by a depiction of the

and sublimation that a person experiences when recognizing higher and

higher kinds of beauty (210a - 212a). Starting with the love of

one beautiful body, the individual gradually learns to appreciate not

only all physical beauty but also the beauty of the mind, and in the

end, she gets a glimpse of the supreme kind of beauty; namely, the

vision of the Form of the Beautiful itself - a beauty that is

Because beauty of the higher kind is tied to virtue and is attained

by the comprehension of what is common in laws and public

institutions, it is clear that Plato does not have purely aesthetic

values in mind but the principles of good order that are ultimately

tied to the Form of the Beautiful/Good. The difference between the

as an incentive to the higher and better, an incentive that, in

principle, affects every human being. There is no talk of a painful

liberation from the bonds of the senses or of a turn-around of the

entire soul that is reserved only for the better educated. Brief as

three things: First, all human beings aim for their own

expression in the products of their work, in creativity. Third, their

particular desire for the beautiful. There is no indication that

individuals must act as part of a community. Though the communitarian

aspect of the good and beautiful comes to the fore in the high praise

of the products of the legendary legislators (209e - 210a), the

ultimate assent to the Beautiful itself is up to the individual. That

intermediary state of human nature between good and bad, and it

Due to the aporetic character of that dialogue, its lesson remains

somewhat obscure, but it is obvious enough that it shares the

psychological doctrine of a tri-partite soul, it also advocates the

doctrine of a division of the soul into three parts, it does so for

reasons of its own: The three parts of the soul in the

into three classes. They explain, rather, the different routes taken

by individuals in their search for beauty and their levels of success.

so in order to show how the enchantment by beauty can be combined with

an element of Plato's philosophy that seems quite alien to the

systematic method of collection and division that is characteristic of

Plato's later work. At first sight, it might seem that the

dialogue's topic, Eros, is hardly the right tie to keep together

poetical depiction of the enchantment by beauty and the ensuing

presuppositions of rhetoric (249b - c). But although the coherence

Rhetoric, its purpose and value, is, in fact, the dialogue's topic

right from the start. The misuse of rhetoric is exemplified by the

speech attributed to the orator Lysias, a somewhat contrived plea to

favor a non-lover rather than a lover. Socrates' retort points

up Lysias' presuppositions: that love is a kind of sickness, an

irrational craving for the pleasures of the body; that a lover tries

mentally; and, most importantly, that the lover tries to deprive the

beloved of philosophy. Once restored to his senses, the lover will shun

his former beloved and break all his promises. This one-sided view of

understood, is not a diseased state of mind but a kind of

nature of this madness, Socrates employs the comparison of the

tripartite soul to a charioteer with a pair of winged horses, an

obedient white one and an unruly black one. The crucial difference

liberation through the uplifting force of love, a love that is -

beauty. That is what first makes the soul grow wings and soar in the

pursuit of a corresponding deity, to the point where it will attain

charioteer has full control over his horses - get a glimpse of

true being, including the nature of the virtues and of the good

(247c - e). Depending on the quality of each soul, the quality of

the beauty pursued will also determine the cycle of reincarnations

that is in store for each soul after death (248c - 249c).

uplifting effect of beauty is not only its exuberant tone and imagery,

and philosophical elements. For, in the midst of his fanciful depiction

of the different fates that are in store for different kinds of souls,

Plato specifies, in quite technical terms, that the capacity "to

understand speech in terms of general Forms, proceeding to bring many

reincarnation of individual souls as human beings. It is this capacity

for abstract thought that he then calls "recollection of what

the soul saw when it was travelling with god, when it disregarded the

things we now call real and lifted up its head to what is truly real

instead." The heavenly adventure now seems to amount to no more

than the employment of the dialectical method that Socrates is going

dialogue's second part. The ability to work out a taxonomy,

establishing the unity in a given subject-matter and dividing it up

according to its natural kinds, is the art that characterizes the

professes the greatest veneration for such a master: "If I

believe that someone is capable of discerning a single thing that is

also by nature capable of encompassing many, I follow 'straight

behind, in his tracks, as if he were a god'." So the

dialectical method - a method that Plato regards as a

'gift of the gods', as he is going to confirm in the

seemingly incongruous two parts as two sides of one coin, and it also

shows why Plato no longer treats the sensory as a mere distraction and

souls' sensory impressions are its first incentives to seek the

inspired' view of human life? Individuals do not, here, find

Instead, life is spent in the perennial pursuit of the higher and

better. But, in that task, the individual is not alone; she shares it

is no permanent attainment of happiness as a stable state of

completion in this life. In the ups and downs of life (and of the

afterlife), humans are in constant need of beauty as an incentive to

aim for self-perfection. Humans are neither god-like nor wise; at

best, they are god-lovers and philosophers, demonic hunters for truth

and goodness. To know is not to have, and to have once is not to have

terms that humans have a perennial need to replenish what they

constantly lose, both in body and soul, because they are mortal and

continued efforts because the heavenly voyage is not a one-time

affair. On the other hand, there is also the message conveyed that the

pursuit of the good and the beautiful is not a lonely enterprise. As

, love for a beautiful human being is an incentive to

search for a higher form of life, a sacred joint journey of two

friends in communion (255a - 256e). The need for, and also the

that will reappear in the ethical thought of Plato's late works,

a motif he sometimes presents as the maxim that humans should aim at

Sober philosophers have a tendency to ignore such visionary talk as a

and exploration of the dialectical method in the later part

as well as artful deception, presupposes knowledge of the truth,

especially where the identity of the phenomena is difficult to grasp,

because similarities can be misleading. This applies in particular to

concepts like the good and the just, as witnessed by the wide

disagreement about their nature (263a - c). The development of the

'sharp eye' that is needed to assign each object to the

right class is the aim of Plato's method of collection and

division, a method on which he expounds at some length in the

. He discusses the care that is needed in order to

"see together things that are scattered about everywhere, and to

"to cut the unity up again according to its species along its

natural joints, and to try not to splinter any part, as a bad butcher

might do (265d - e)." That this method is supposed to serve

an overall ethical purpose is confirmed by the fact that rhetoric

based on truth must reflect the speaker's knowledge not only of

the different types of souls and the types of speech that fit them

(271d) but also of the truth about just and good things (272d).

That dialectic is geared to this end is somewhat obscured in the

turns away from this issue in his long depiction of the iniquities of

of the scientific rhetorician. And Plato continues this excursion with

a discussion of speaking and writing, culminating in his famous

use of the method of collection and division in later dialogues such

little heed there to problems of ethics, with the exception of the

discerning the nature of the good has already been emphasized in the

distinguish in an account the Form of the Good from everything else,

can survive all refutation as if in battle... you will say that he

does not know the good itself or any other good." Brief as these

remarks are, they show that the application of dialectic is of central

importance to the understanding and pursuit of the good. That the good

is nowhere subjected to such treatment must be due to the enormity of

the task involved in undertaking a systematic identification of all

that is good and in working out the criteria of distinction. Although

refined the dialectical method in the systematic way indicated in the

way' (435d; 504b) to determine the nature of justice and that of

the other virtues suggest that the development of a systematic method

of collection and division was at least 'in the works'. As

determination of what is good about each kind of thing presupposes

more than a classification by collection and division: the internal

structure of each kind of entity has also to be determined. Knowledge

is not confined to the comprehension of the objects' being,

identity, difference and other interrelations that exist in a given

field. It also presupposes the knowledge of what constitutes the

objects' internal unity and complexity. It would, of course, be

rather presumptuous to claim that Plato had not seen the need to

taxonomy, of the Forms from early on. But as the late dialogues show,

it took him quite some effort to develop the requisite conceptual

Before we turn to the late dialogues, a final review is in order of

venture' of two kindred souls. True friends will get to the

highest point of self-fulfillment through the joint insights that they

deemed the best. But then, this preference is found everywhere in

Plato, and it is not unique to him: All ancient philosophers regard

their own occupation as the true fulfillment of human nature -

as they saw it. If there are differences between them, they concern

the kinds of study and occupation that they deemed appropriate for the

be seen as a later stage in Plato's development than the

complementary, rather than rival, points of view, and no fixed

Most modern readers of Plato tend to ignore the significance of

Plato's late dialogues for his ethical views, for late dialogues

metaphysics - and, for the most part, drop questions such as the

nature of the virtues and the moral psychology of the soul. This

appears to be a shift in emphasis since nature and natural things are

not among the objects that concern Plato in his earlier and middle

dismisses the study of the visible heaven from the curriculum of

higher learning, along with the study of audible music. But, such

he denigrates is not the study of the heavenly order as such or that

of harmonics; it is, rather, the extent to which humans must necessarily

rely on their eyes and ears in those concerns. Students of philosophy

are, rather, encouraged to work out the true intelligible order

underlying the visible heaven and audible music. Not only that: The

ascent out of the Cave does include recognition of objects outside,

516a - b). If Plato is critical of natural science, it is because

complaint that one ruins one's eyes by looking directly at

ignoring the 'binding force' of the good. But what kind of

in his metaphysics and ethics, is largely responsible for the

obscurity of his concept of happiness and of what it is to lead a good

basis for the good life of the entire community, as well as for that

benefit from the good order of the state. But what is 'the

Good' that is responsible for the goodness of all other things?

A lot of ink has been spilt over the following passage in

power." The analogy with the sun's maintenance of all that

is alive suggests that the Good is the intelligent inner principle

that determines the nature of every object that is capable of

goodness, in the sense that these objects fulfill their respective

functions in the appropriate way. Plato does not attempt to state how

such a principle of goodness works in all things in the

, nor does he indicate whether he has in mind a

unifying principle in a strong sense. That he is indeed thinking of an

indicated, however, in Book X, in his elucidation of the ontological

products of a divine maker, their earthly copies, and the imitation of

determines what it is to be good (601d): "Aren't the

virtue or excellence, the beauty and correctness of each manufactured

item, living creature, and action related to nothing but the use

Given that Plato does not limit this account to tools or instruments

but explicitly includes living things and human actions, he seems to

have a specific criterion in mind for what constitutes each

a human being, and to what extent can there be a common principle that

is answered only indirectly through the isomorphism of the just state

and the just soul, based on a harmonious internal order. The postulate

of such an orderly structure is not explicitly extended beyond the

state and the soul. In the later dialogues, by contrast, the Good

clearly operates on a cosmic scale. That such is Plato's view

comes to the fore in his excursus on the philosopher's nature in

affirms that the philosopher is to pursue both "what lies below

"tracking down by every path the entire nature of each whole

among the things that are." And Socrates also concerns himself

there with the question of "What is man? What actions and

passions properly belong to human nature and distinguish it from all

other beings?" In that connection, he compares the discovery of

) and indicates that there is a unitary principle of

goodness. The ability to achieve this superhuman state depends on

explained in terms of its being a smaller copy of a harmonious

The universe and its soul now supply the 'large text' for

deciphering the nature of the human soul. The structure of the

world-soul is replicated in the nature of the human soul. That there

the cosmological project that Plato means to pursue in the

universe, including human nature, is presented as the first step

towards fulfilling Socrates' wish to see his own best city

Strong indications speak, however, for a much later date of the

. If Plato establishes a link between these two works,

his intent is to compare as well as to contrast. The continuity

consists solely in the fact that Socrates reaffirms his adherence to

. 17c - 19b). It is this order that Critias promises

to illustrate by a narration of the tale of two cities, of the war

between pre-historic Athens, a city that exemplifies the ideal order,

20d - 26e). However, Plato never completed this project: The

, whatever was to have been its content, was never

written at all. So, the story of Socrates' ideal city

and of the life of its citizens remains untold. All we

have is Plato's cosmic model for such a state and the soul of

that, in the latter dialogue, Plato concerns himself with the structure

of the visible heaven as a model for the human soul and also with the

material conditions of human physiology. What is confined to mythology

in Plato's earlier works is here worked out - though not

structure of the universe, of the human soul, and of human physiology.

Plato's choice of presenting his explanation of the order of the

universe as a story of creation by a so-called demiurge or

because of its inferiority to a model conceivable in theory. To be

principles to explain the cosmic order (27d - 29d; 30c - 31b),

but the focus is almost exclusively on the construction of the visible

heavens. Plato now seems to have convinced himself that in order to

explain the nature of a living being, it is necessary to show what

that make the dialogue hard to penetrate, for it falls into three

rather disparate parts. The first part describes the structure of the

world-soul and its replication in the human soul in a way that

harmonics and illustrates it with fantastic imagery (29d - 47e).

The second part consists of a rather meticulous account of the

formed out of geometrically constructed atoms (47e - 69a). The

third part combines elements from the first and second parts in a

greatly taxes one's ability to relate the notion of a divinely

created world-soul to the motions of the visible heavens because

mathematical, and harmonic structure that is to explain these motions.

By contrast, the explanations in the second and third parts are hard to

structure and the dynamics of the basic elements of the physical world

in general and with that of human physiology in particular.

But why does Plato burden himself and his readers with such a complex

machinery, and what does this heavenly instrument have to do with

ethics? Since the human soul is formed out of the same ingredients as

the world soul (albeit of a less pure kind) and displays the same

structure (41d - e), Plato is clearly not just concerned with the

order of the universe but with that of the human soul as well. He

attributes to it the possession of the kinds of concepts that are

necessary for the understanding of the nature of all things, both

eternal and temporal. The soul's ingredients are here limited to

the purely general concepts and to mathematical proportions. There is

no reference to a theory of recollection of the nature of all things.

Rather, Plato is concerned to ascertain that the soul has all the

tools for dealing with all objects: (1) the most important concepts

necessary for the identification and the differentiations in the way

all sorts; (3) the capacity of the soul to perform and comprehend

harmoniously coordinated motions. This, it seems, is all the soul

needs and all it gets so that it can perform its various tasks. The

it hard, at first, to penetrate to the rationale of its construction,

and it must remain an open question to what extent Plato expects his

model to be taken in a literal rather than in a figurative sense. His

of other entities and, therefore, has access to all that is good and

harmonious. This last point has consequences for his ethical thought

is relevant for ethics is, of course, not confined to his late work.

blames Callicles for the undisciplined state of his soul and

) has great power among both gods and men." But

it is unclear whether this expression is to be taken in a more than

metaphorical sense; it is, at any rate, not repeated anywhere else in

Plato's earlier work. There is also no indication that Plato

nature of the virtues in his middle dialogues. If mathematics looms

large, then, it is as a model science on account of its exactness, the

stability of its objects, and their accessibility to reason. A

systematic exploration of the notion that measure and proportion are

the fundamental conditions of goodness is confined to the late

precise cosmic and mental order, there is a crucial passage in the

kind is the ordinary measuring of quantities relative to each other

('the great and small'). The second kind has a normative

concern, for the Eleatic Stranger claims that it is the basis of all

expertise, including statesmanship, the very art that is the subject

of that dialogue (284a - b): "It is by preserving measure in

this way that they produce all the good and fine things they do

produce." His point is that all good productions and all

processes of generation that come to a good end presuppose

more and less') have no such results. The Eleatic Stranger

therefore suggests a separation of the simple arts of measuring from

the arts concerned with due measure (284e): "Positing as one

part all those sorts of expertise that measure the numbers, lengths,

depths, breadths and speeds of things in relation to what is opposed

to them, and as the other, all those that measure in relation to what

measure must be presupposed in the final definition of the statesman

as a 'kingly weaver', weaving together the fabric of the

state by combining the aggressive and the moderate temperaments in the

population so as to produce a harmonious citizenry (305e - 311c).

But no mathematic procedure is specified as the condition of such a

is concerned with the question of whether pleasure or knowledge is the

state of mind that constitutes happiness. In that dialogue, number

) play a crucial role at various points of the

requires that numerical precision must be observed in the application

collection and division (16c - 17a). The dialectician must know

precisely how many species and subspecies a certain genus contains;

otherwise, he has no claim to any kind of expertise. Despite this

emphasis on precision and on the need to determine the numerical

envisaged kind of collection and division of pleasure and knowledge.

He avoids that task with the pretense that he suddenly remembers that

neither of the two contenders suffices in itself for the happy life

and that a mixture of the two is preferable. To explain the nature of

this mixture, Socrates introduces a fourfold division of all beings

(23c - 27c), a division that uses the categories of

structure. As Socrates states, all beings belong in one of four

unlimited comprises all those things that have no exact measure or

grade in themselves, such as what is hotter and colder, faster and

slower. Although at first the examples are confined to relative terms,

the class of the unlimited is then extended to things like hot and

cold, dry and moist, fast and slow, and even heat and frost, i.e., to

all that has no fixed limit or degree. Mixture takes place when such

) that puts a definite limit on their variety. That

only measured entities qualify as mixtures is not only suggested by

the examples Socrates refers to (health, strength, beauty, music, and

the seasons) but by his assertion, later in the dialogue, that a

mixture without due measure or proportion does not deserve its name

(64d - e): "it will necessarily corrupt its ingredients and

most of all itself. For there would be no blending in such cases at

all but only an unconnected medley, the ruin of whatever happens to be

contained in it." The upshot of this discussion is that all

pairs of opposites, the right limit in each case must be the right

proportion necessary for their balance. In the case of health, there

will be the right balance between the hot and the cold, the dry and

the moist. The cause of the proper proportion for each mixture turns

; it is the only member of the fourth class.

As Socrates indicates, divine reason is the ultimate source of all

that is good and harmonious in the universe, while human reason

constitutes order down here (26e - 27c; 28a - 30e).

The adoption of this fourfold ontology allows Socrates to assign

pleasure and knowledge to two of the four classes of being: Pleasure

turns out to be unlimited because it admits of the 'more and

less'. Reason, by contrast, belongs to the fourth class, to the

causes of good mixtures. On the basis of this classification, Socrates

provides the criteria for a critical assessment of the different kinds

of pleasure and knowledge (31b - 59d) and presents happiness as a

mixture of all kinds of knowledge with true and pure kinds of pleasure

(59d-64b). In a final 'ranking of goods', measure and due

of the soul, things in proper proportion come in second, reason is

ranked third, the arts and sciences obtain fourth place, whereas the

true and pure pleasures get fifth and last place on the scale of goods

disposed towards a hedonist stance than in some of his earlier works,

he is so only to a quite limited degree: He regards pleasure as a

necessary ingredient in human life because both the physical and the

psychic equilibria that constitute human nature are unstable. In a

includes learning and the pursuit of the virtues, there are some

pleasures that are rightly cherished. But even they are deemed goods

only insofar as they are a compensation for human imperfection.

of how serious Plato is about such a 'mathematization' of

his principles, quite generally. Though harmony and order have been

ethics from early on, in his late dialogues, he seems to envisage right

measure in a literal sense. This explains his confidence that even

physical entities can attain a relatively stable state. As he suggests

everything is in a constant flux. On the contrary, those things that

possess the measures that are right for their type are stable entities

and can be the objects of 'firm and true beliefs and

to the nature of the visible universe but also to the human body and

mind. Plato seems to have felt encouraged to embrace such theories by

the advances of astronomy and harmonics in his own lifetime so that

Plato's confidence seems to have extended not only to the

physical but also to the moral state of human nature. That assumption

is confirmed not only by the emphasis on right mixture in the

about how the laws are to achieve peace in the state and harmony in

the souls of the citizens. Plato no longer treats the emotions as a

menace to the virtues; rather, he assigns to the legislators the task

of providing for an adequate balance of pleasure and pain by

habituating the citizens in the right way (632a - 643a). This

liberal soul (I 636e): "Pleasure and pain flow like two springs

released by nature. If a man draws the right amount from the right

spring at the right time, he lives a happy life." Suffice it to

note that the comments concerning the right measure of pleasure and

pain form the preface to the entire project. That there is a

concerning the measure of pleasure and pain. The function assigned,

there, to the right measure of pleasure and pain in the

Aristotelian conception of the moral virtues as the right mean between

excess and deficiency (II 653b - c): "Virtue is this general

concord of reason and emotion. But there is one element you could

isolate in any account you give, and this is the correct formation of

our feelings of pleasure and pain, which makes us hate what we ought

to hate from first to last, and love what we ought to love." The

culminates in the famous maxim that God (rather than Protagoras'

Man) is the measure of all things (IV 716c - d): "In our

view, it is God who is preeminently the 'measure of all

things', much more so than any man, as they say. So if you want

to recommend yourself to someone of this character, you must do your

level best to make your own character reflect his, and on this

principle the moderate man is God's friend, being like him,

whereas the immoderate and unjust man is not like him and is his

enemy; and the same reasoning applies to the other vices too."

But because Plato, like Aristotle after him, carefully refrains from

any kind of specifications of concrete right measures, we should treat

the 'arithmetic' of the good life with a pinch of salt.

That individuals differ in their internal and external conditions is

as clear to Plato as it is to Aristotle. This does not shake

through the right kind of education, most of all in the arts, will

provide the necessary inner equilibrium in the soul of the good

Are Plato's views of human nature and the human good more

sympathetic to democratic standards in his last works? If we look at

the human soul in 'orderly circles', Plato seems to remain

as demanding and elitist as ever. But he no longer puts so much

emphasis on the distance between the best and the ordinary. As he

from the rest of humankind in mind and body like the queen-bees do in

the hive (301d-e). Further, even the best of the souls of human beings

are far inferior to the world-soul, because, in the case of human souls,

beings suggests that Plato has become more democratic in the sense

that he regards the 'human herd' as a more uniform flock

than he did in his earlier days. He retains the conviction, however,

that a well-ordered soul is the prerequisite of the good life and that

human beings stand in need not only of a careful moral education but

also of a well-regulated life. Whether a life in Plato's

nomocracy would better please modern minds than a life ruled by

philosopher-kings is a question that would require a careful perusal

of that enormous compendium of regulations and laws, which makes the

But that compendium is at the same time a valuable sourcebook for all

those interested in Plato's late moral thought (for a more